           polymers
Article
A Physics-Informed Assembly of Feed-Forward
Neural Network Engines to Predict Inelasticity in
Cross-Linked Polymers
Aref Ghaderi , Vahid Morovati              and Roozbeh Dargazany *
 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA;
 ghaderi1@msu.edu (A.G.); morovati@msu.edu (V.M.)
 * Correspondence: roozbeh@msu.edu
                                                                                                   
 Received: 19 October 2020; Accepted: 5 November 2020; Published: 9 November 2020                  


 Abstract: In solid mechanics, data-driven approaches are widely considered as the new paradigm
 that can overcome the classic problems of constitutive models such as limiting hypothesis,
 complexity, and accuracy. However, the implementation of machine-learned approaches in material
 modeling has been modest due to the high-dimensionality of the data space, the significant size
 of missing data, and limited convergence. This work proposes a framework to hire concepts
 from polymer science, statistical physics, and continuum mechanics to provide super-constrained
 machine-learning techniques of reduced-order to partly overcome the existing difficulties. Using a
 sequential order-reduction, we have simplified the 3D stress–strain tensor mapping problem into
 a limited number of super-constrained 1D mapping problems. Next, we introduce an assembly of
 multiple replicated neural network learning agents (L-agents) to systematically classify those mapping
 problems into a few categories, each of which were described by a distinct agent type. By capturing all
 loading modes through a simplified set of dispersed experimental data, the proposed hybrid assembly
 of L-agents provides a new generation of machine-learned approaches that simply outperform most
 constitutive laws in training speed, and accuracy even in complicated loading scenarios. Interestingly,
 the physics-based nature of the proposed model avoids the low interpretability of conventional
 machine-learned models.

 Keywords: cross-linked polymer; constitutive model; data-driven; Mullins effect; neural network




1. Introduction
      The wide range applications of cross-linked polymers in several industries such as automotive,
structural, medical, to name but a few, have made them an attractive area of research. These materials
have a 3D network configuration consisting of randomly oriented long molecular chains, which are
cross-linked, spiraled and tangled among themselves or neighbors. They are typically classified into
filled and unfilled categories. Fillers, in most cases, can reinforce polymers (see Figure 1). Regarding the
various applications of these materials, modeling their mechanical behavior in a broad range of strains
is of great importance. In quasi-static deformations, these materials show hyper-elastic behavior.
This behavior is dominantly governed by changes in network entropy, where the chains reorient in
response to the applied macroscopic deformations. Farhangi et al. investigated the effect of fiber
reinforced polymer tubes filled with recycled materials [1,2]. Izadi et al. investigated the effect
of nanoparticles on mechanical properties of polymers [3–5]. Accordingly, several studies have
investigated this hyper-elastic behavior based on phenomenological or micromechanical approaches
which use statistics of molecular chains networks (see reviews [6,7]). Shojaeifar et al. [8,9] developed a
model for modeling of visco-hyperelasticity of materials. Phenomenological approaches are empirical,


Polymers 2020, 12, 2628; doi:10.3390/polym12112628                           www.mdpi.com/journal/polymers
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                        2 of 20



simple, and less interpretable; however, micromechanical approaches are highly interpretable but
complex because they consider the readjustment of kinks, the rearrangement of convolutions,
reorientation, and uncoiling of molecular chains. Meanwhile, the emergence of machine-learned
(ML) models has attracted much attention as a way to address the mentioned challenges of the
phenomenological and micromechanical approaches.

                                                                              Polymer chain    Chemical bond




                                                          Cross-link         Nano particles



                   Macro scale                      Micro scale                       Nano scale
      Figure 1. Schematic illustration for micro-structure of filled elastomers which is depicted micro scale
      and nano scale.

      The exponential growth of computational power over the last decade has enabled the
first-generation of ML models to be used in computational mechanics and polymer physics [10–13].
Current ML models were often developed based on “black box” approaches, which, besides low
interpretability, require a large volume of training data to prescribe a particular behavior [14,15].
In solid mechanics, stress–strain tensors are only partially observable in lower-dimensions.
Thus, obtaining data to feed the black-box ML model is exceptionally challenging. In general, one can
classify current data-driven efforts in computational mechanics into three categories with lots of
approaches placed between two categories (see review [16]).
      - Model-free distance-minimization approaches were developed to circumvent the need for
constitutive models by directly finding stress–strain pairs with the least distance to experimental
data, which also satisfy compatibility and equilibrium constraints. This approach was initially set
for nonlinear truss and linear elastic materials [17] and later was expanded to include hyper-elastic
materials [18]. While being superior to other models by being statistically independent of any prior
knowledge of the materials, the method has a few major limitations. It has an excessively high
computational cost, strong sensitivity to data scattering, and in high-dimensional problems suffers
from lack of data [19]. This approach is further amended by studies on the combination of data-driven
identification and computational mechanics [20]. To reformulate the heuristic optimization approach
adopted by [17], mixed-integer programming was used for its implementation [21]. Coelho and
Breitkopf [22] in their book investigated the main approaches for constitutive modeling using
optimization methods.
      - Non-linear dimensionality reduction approaches seek to build a constitutive manifold from
experimental data to describe an accurate approximation of the strain energy in different states of
deformation. These approaches focus on describing the constitutive behavior through a set of shape
functions, such as B-spline [23], with constants derived through the LSQ error minimization [24–26]
or an ML approach [27]. Mainly derived from the WYPiWYG model [28], this approach focuses on
solving the system of linear equations which consist of coefficients of shape functions, rather than
nonlinear fitting a predefined model. In elasticity, manifold learning is more efficient and more accurate
than black-box ML models and it has already been generalized to cover damage [29]. In Matous’s
study, a manifold-based reduced order model was proposed [30]. This model relies on non-linear
dimensionality reduction and the connection of macroscopic loading parameters to reduced space
using an artificial neural network (ANN). Fritzen et. al [31] proposed a data-driven homogenization
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                              3 of 20



method for hyper-elastic solids using the reduced order method. In their work, the surrogate model
combines radial basis functions and piece-wise cubic polynomials. The main problem with these
approaches is the large number of tests needed for validation and their dependency on the assumption
of constitutive manifolds with a particular functional structure [26].
     - Autonomous approaches incorporate ML models as surrogate functions to capture the
high-dimensional and non-smooth micro-scale behavior of material constituents, which has been
shown to be a successful approach in multi-scale analysis [32]. Several multi-scale methods of
analysis have been proposed based on the implementation of micro-scale ML models into the
reduced-order FE simulations of the macro-scale approach [12]. This coupling allows for the
scalable utilization of ML surrogate models. However, the validity range of current ML models
is extremely limited due to a number of reasons: (i) the unconstrained search space of optimization
variables, (ii) neglecting underlying physics, (iii) difficulties in deriving parameter feasibility ranges,
and (iv) lack of transition models to reduce the order of the problem. Recently, by implementing the
reinforcement learning concept, a new class of ML meta-models has been successfully developed
based on (non)cooperative games, where the model trains a pair of L-agents to emulate a specific
performance through turn-based trial and error [33]. This paradigm employs ML techniques to
capture the behavior and interaction of micro-structures as a surrogate model. In Stoffel’s study [34],
they replace the viscoplastic material law in finite element simulation with a feed-forward neural
network to make an intelligent element. Another study [35] was conducted to predict the tension
response of rubber by a feed-forward neural network. They used strain values and filler percentages
as inputs generated from a regression model and stress as output. Kaliske and Zopf [36] proposed
an inelastic model-free approach represented by recurrent neural networks for uncured elastomers.
For history-dependent functions, naturally, recurrent neural networks offer attractive alternatives,
but require enormous amounts of training paths of standardized lengths, which are highly non-trivial.
In 2019, Haghighat et al. [37] proposed a physics-informed neural network that solves any given
law of physics described by non-linear partial differential equations. Another study [38] showed the
performance of this model for linear elasticity, and Xu et al. [39] modeled viscoelastic materials using
physic constrained learning. Recently, we developed a Bayesian surrogate constitutive model based
on Bayesian regression and Gaussian process [40] to consider uncertainty of a model [41]. A recent
study [12] proposed a data-driven constitutive model by predicting a non-linear constitutive law using
a neural network surrogate model constructed using a learning phase on a set of RVE non-linear
computations. An investigation was conducted to formulate a constitutive model for rate-dependent
materials by neural network and its implementation in finite element analysis. The challenge of a
sufficient dataset for training, however, still remains [42].
     Here, a cooperative multi-agent system B di = Aij , i ∈ {1, n} , j ∈ {1, m} is proposed to
describe different features in material behavior by using n × m different machine-learned agents
(L-agents) which learn from experimental datasets. To reduce problem dimensionality, the 3D matrix is
represented by m 1D directions, which allows researchers to replicate each L-agent m times to represent
the 1D behavior of the material. The proposed model trains each agent to emulate a certain material
behavior with the objective function being the error between the overall prediction of the system and
the experimental data. Model fusion is used to integrate all L-agents back into a centralized system.
     The main contributions of this work are to infuse knowledge of physics into the model through
certain modeling constraints: namely, (1) by providing a new data-driven model based on physics
behind a machine learning process for predicting non-linear mechanical behavior of cross-linked
polymers, (2) the first data-driven model that captures inelastic behavior of cross-linked polymers
such as Mullins effect and permanent set, (3) a new paradigm with the upgrade-ability of model
from hyper-elastic to damage behavior roots from easy transformation from the integration of
micro-mechanics to the machine learning process, (4) proposing a new model with better training speed
and accuracy compared to several well-known models. There are two types of cross-linked polymers.
One type shows hyper-elastic behavior; however, another type does not have hyper-elasticity at all.
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                                                          4 of 20



In this study, our focus is on cross-linked polymers which have hyper-elasticity such as rubbers and
elastomers. This paper is organized as follows; in Section 2, the main concepts of non-linear behavior
and deformation-induced damage in cross-linked polymers are introduced and described in detail.
Section 3 explains the idea and formulation of the proposed model in detail. Model verification
with experimental data on rubber inelasticity is discussed in Section 4. Section 5 provides some
concluding remarks and outlines some perspectives. Finally, in the appendix section, we explain
frame-independence, polyconvexity, and thermodynamic consistency.

2. Non-Linear Features in Cross-Linked Polymers
     Hyper-elasticity in most materials (i.e., cross-linked polymers) is defined by the nonlinear
elastic behavior in large deformations. Meanwhile, cross-linked polymers often exhibit inelastic
features in their hyper-elastic behavior, e.g., damage after first elongation known as Mullins
effect [43,44]. This phenomenon happens to both types of filled and non-filled cross-linked polymers.
To provide a better understanding of micro-structural sources of such inelastic effects, Figure 2
shows some of the physical sources in amorphous polymeric systems such as chain breakage [45],
chain disentanglement [46], molecules slipping [47], and rupture in cluster of fillers [48]. After primary
loading, deformation-induced damage often leads to a residual strain known as permanent set.
While the permanent set in unfilled rubber is negligible, it becomes prominent in most filled
compounds. Figure 2e provides a schematic view on different inelastic features in the hyper-elastic
behavior of a polymeric system.

                                        Bond rupture                         Molecules slipping
                           (a)                                 ( b)



                                               deformation                            deformation




                Filler rupture                         Disentanglement                         Mullins effect + Permanent set
   ( c)                                      ( d)                                   ( e)
                                                                                                                                Mullins Effect




                                                                                                                       g
                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                 ad
                                                                                                               Lo
                                                                                     Stress




                          deformation                          deformation
                                                                                                               g
                                                                                                              din
                                                                                                         loa
                                                                                                       Re




                                                                                              Permanent Set           Stretch

                     Figure 2. Schematic physical explanation of deformation induced damage.

     To model the inelastic features in the behavior of cross-linked polymers, previous efforts were
mostly focused on phenomenological and physics-based approaches. Physics-based approaches are
often excessively complicated for real-time applications, and phenomenological models are not reliable
outside design condition. Here, by coupling a physics-based approach to machine learned L-agents,
we devise a knowledge-driven ML approach to address inelastic features in hyper-elastic behavior of
cross-linked polymers. Therefore, to model the nonlinear behavior of cross-linked polymers, we select
an appropriate neural network consisting of proper activation functions and the appropriate number
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                              5 of 20



of layers and neurons. In addition, to model damages, internal parameters of L-agents are designed
based on the type of materials’ memory. In a material with full memory such as rubbery materials
with damage, only the maximum status of history affects the next sequence. Using a micro-sphere as a
directional model of polymer matrix guarantees modeling of inelastic features such as permanent set.
These steps are explained in the next section in detail.

3. Physics-Based Reduction
     To model the second order stress–strain fields required for characterization of hyper-elastic
material, current approaches ranging from phenomenological to data-driven, face one major challenge,
namely lack of data on 3D structures. There are no tools to measure stress field across a structure,
and for strain we can only measure the strain field for relatively simple structures using digital image
correlation (DIC) techniques [49].
     Helmholtz free energy Ψ is a function of both deformation and temperature. Differentiating Ψ with
respect to kinematic state variables at constant temperature yields internal forces (i.e., stresses) defined
per unit mass. For the case in which Ψ is solely a function of deformation (i.e., isothermal processes),
the Helmholtz free energy referred to as the strain energy function.
     For hyper-elastic materials, strain energy is derived directly from the Clausius–Planck form
of the second law of thermodynamics through different work conjugate pairs, such as two-point
strain/stress tensors (F/deformation gradient: P/first-order Piola stress), material strain/stress
tensors (E/Lagrange strain: S/second-order Piola stress), and spatial strain/stress tensors (L/Hencky
strain: τ/Kirchhoff stress). Strain energy function must accompany conditions like normalization,
growth conditions, isotropy, objectivity, and polyconvexity, which guarantee the uniqueness of the
solution (Appendixs A–C). In view of the lack of data on the stress fields, a proper modeling approach is
expected to be able to only use the limited information obtained from the classical characterization tests
on the collective sample behavior. In rare cases, a model can be provided by digital image correlation
reconstruction of 2D strain fields, which shall be used for model validation but should not become
necessary data for model fitting in view of the cost/complexity of the experiment. The challenge of
significant missing data has been historically addressed by implementing knowledge of the material
behavior in the model and to constrain the model in advance before having the data. Such a solution
is not relevant in data-driven approaches due to the lack of infused knowledge of the material.
Here, we propose addressing the challenge of significant missing data in high-dimensional data-driven
approaches through a physics-driven order-reduction approach by infusing knowledge through
implementation of the concepts of micro-sphere, network decomposition, continuum mechanics,
and polymer physics. Accordingly, we developed a sufficiently constrained machine-learned model
that can predict the material behavior solely based on the macro-scale collective behavior of the sample.
Figure 3 demonstrates a schematic of the proposed model simplification idea.
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                                                                                                                                    6 of 20



                                                                                    Polymer Matrix


                                                                                                                                                                  Cooperative Learning
                                                                                                                                                                   Multi-Agent System



                                                                                                                                                                        Multi-Agent System



                                                                                     Microsphere
                                                                                                                                                                 L-Agent                   L-Agent
                                                                                                                                                        1                   1         Ns             1

                                                                                                         Sub-Network 1




                                                                                                   Sub-Network 2




                                                                                                                                                                 L-Agent N                 L-Agent N
                                                                                                                                                        1                     d       Ns               d
             Knowledge




                                                                                                                                                                           Agent Team




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Modeling
                                                                                       Element

                                                                                            Sub-Element 1

                                                       Sub-Network 1
                                                                                                                                                                             L-Agent 1
                                                 Sub-Network 2




                                                                                       Sub-Element Ns




                                                                                                                                                                           L-Agent Nd


                                                                                     Sub-Elements
                                                                                                                                                                             Agent Type
                                     Sub-Element 1
                                                                                         Sub-Element 1




                                Sub-Element Ns
                                                                                                                                                                      L-Agent 1       L-Agent Ns
                                                                                        Sub-Element Ns


                                                                                                                                  1               3

                                                                                                                         Order-Reduction       Model Fusion
                                                                                                                                                                                  L-Agent
                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                             Polymer Chains                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                             𝒅𝒊                                            𝒅𝒊
                                                                                                                                                        𝝀j                 WI11            WI21      𝝍j
                                                                                                                                                                 𝒅𝒊
                                  Sub-Element j                                                                                                       𝝀j 𝒎𝒂𝒙




                     Figure 3. Schematic of the proposed model from order-reduction to model fusion.

3.1. Continuum Mechanics
      We introduce the first and the most important constraint from continuum mechanics’
understanding on 3D mapping of second order stress/strain tensors. While F → P mapping generally
needs a complicated fourth order tensor C = PF , in hyper-elastic materials, unlike hypo-elastic materials,
the procedure can be simplified using an internal energy density function. Accordingly, we can use
finite strain theory to simplify F → P mapping by introducing of the strain energy Ψm as the middle
agent in mapping, where F → Ψm → P. The strain energy is a non-negative scalar-valued function
Ψm (F) which can replace part of the process required to derive tensor-valued stress function P(F).
The increment of Ψm denotes the stress required to change the strain field, and thus Ψm can be described
with respect to any stress–strain work conjugates such as (i) two-point tensors, (ii) material tensors,
or (iii) spatial tensors, as shown below:

                                                                            ∂Ψm                                           ∂Ψm                                         ∂Ψm
                                                                       P=       ,               S=                            ,                τ=                         .                                                   (1)
                                                                             ∂F                                            ∂E                                          ∂L
    One particular advantage of using Ψm as a middle agent is that it ensures the material objectivity,
and thermodynamic consistency on all the derived constitutive models (see Truesdell et al. [50]).
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                         7 of 20



Considering the physics of the problem, certain restrictions exist for strain energy which need to be
enforced further in the data-driven model, namely

                          Ψm (F) ≥ 0       when      F 6= 0                     Increase energy by deforming,
                          Ψm (F) = 0       when      F=I                        Normalization condition,           (2)
                      Ψm (F) → ∞           when      detF → ∞/0                 Growth condition.

     Further restrictions can be introduced by finite strain theory to ensure stability of Ψm in large
deformations of certain materials. For hyper-elastic materials, ellipticity is a major concern which
can be enforced by verifying the strain energy in the absence of traction forces in two arbitrary
directions [51]. Verifying this condition is generally labor-intensive, so polyconvexity is introduced
as a stronger condition that entails ellipticity. It is also simpler to verify [52], as discussed in the
Appendices A–C. Therefore, the first constraint that we enforce in our model, is enforcing agents to derive
Ψm (F) such that it satisfies Equation (2) and polyconvexity condition.

3.2. Micro-Sphere
     The second constraint is implemented based on polymer physics, in particular topology of a
cross-linked amorphous network. Knowing amorphous systems are isotropic at the virgin state,
polymer chains are considered to be uniformly distributed in all spatial directions. Such homogenized
spatial arrangement of polymer chains allows us to use the micro-sphere concept to represent the
3D matrix as a homogeneous assembly of similar 1D elements that are distributed in different
spatial directions over a micro-sphere (see Figure 3). This approach can transfer information from
super-simplified 1D elements to generate complex 3D behavior of the matrix via homogenization over
the unit-sphere. Furthermore, by discretizing the sphere into finite sections, the integration can be taken
out numerically over Nd integration directions [di ]i=1...Nd with different weight factors [wi ]i=1...n [53].
Accordingly, strain energy of the matrix Ψm with respect to its elements can be written as:

                                                          Nd
                                   1
                                       Z
                                                     d
                           Ψm =                Ψdm dS ∼= ∑ w i Ψ m di ,              where   Ψm di = B di          (3)
                                  4π       S              i =1

where Ψm di is the energy of sub-matrix element in direction di , which will be represented by
one team of L-agent B di , which represents an additive cooperation between multiple L-agents Ai• .
                                                    RθRφ
Equation (3) represents the integral S(θ, φ) = 0 0 sin (θ )dθdφ over the unit-sphere with the unit
vector r = sin (θ ) cos (φ)ex + sin (θ ) sin (φ)ey + cos (φ)ez (see Figure 4). Assuming identical team in
all directions in the virgin state, namely B di = B dj , initial isotropy is assured, although the material can
quickly become anisotropic due to different loading on different directions. Moreover, since L-agents
react to varying loading in each direction, the model can consider the onset of damage, deterioration,
and propagation of cascading failure in materials with directional response.

                                                                   ez


                                                                        𝜃
                                                                                dS
                                                                            r

                                                                                     ey
                                                                   𝜙
                                                              ex




           Figure 4. The unit micro-sphere and the orientation vector in terms of spherical coordinates.
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                 8 of 20



3.3. Network Decomposition
     The third constraint is derived from statistical mechanics, namely by infusing the concept of
superposition, which allows us to predict complicated patterns by superposing simple patterns on
top of each other. The concept, also known as the network decomposition concept in constitutive
modeling [54], will be carried out by representing the energy of an element,Ψm di by superposing the
energy of multiple sub-elements, Ψm di = ∑ N j=1 Ψ j , where each sub-element is responsible for one
                                               s    di

simple inelastic feature. Representing each sub-element by one L-agent, we can calculate the energy
of one element by a team of cooperative L-agents B di = [Aij ], and then replicating this cooperative
team in different directions to provide us with the energy of the matrix. To this end, by substituting
Equation (3), we can directly derive the energy of the matrix with respect to sub-elements and the
L-agents which represent them as given here

                                                             Nd Ns
                                      1
                                          Z
                                                         d
                             Ψm =                 Ψm d dS ∼= ∑ ∑ wi ψj di
                                     4π       S             i =1 j =1
                                     Nd Ns                                      Ns
                             Ψm ≈ ∑ ∑ wi Aij               where        Ψm di = ∑ Aij .                    (4)
                                    i =1 j =1                                   j =1

where Ns is the number of sub-elements considered for each element. Consequently, we derived
super-simplified scalar-to-scalar mapping behavior for each element, which can be represented by a
simplified 2-layer feed-forward neural network L-agent Aij . While training data are only available
on collective behavior of the L-agents, the input parameters can be defined for each L-agent team
individually. Each L-agent, Aij := ψij (Ei , M j ), will be trained based on a set of non-kinematic input
Ei and internal M j parameters, which depending on material memory (full or recent), can satisfy
normalization, growth conditions, isotropy, objectivity, and polyconvexity.
     The input vector is independent of the sub-element definition and should represent the problem
setting, material or loading, e.g., stretch and time. Internal parameters are specifically hypothesized
for the model to capture the evolution of damage and vary for each network. The behavior of all
teams should be identical in the virgin state to represent initial isotropy, so one has Aij = Akj ∀i 6= k.
Accordingly, we only assume different ANN types for L-agents associated to different sub-elements.
All replicated agents associated to one sub-element are the same despite being distributed in different
teams to represent different directions. For the replicated agents, only the inputs are different
depending on their direction (see Figure 3). Therefore, the energy of one sub-element can be written as
                                        d
                                      ψj i = Aij = ANN j (Wj , Ei , M j ),                                 (5)

where W j is the weight vector associated to L-agent A•j , and W = [W 1 ...W Ns ] is the weight matrix
representing assembly of all W j . Consequently, based on Equations (1) and (4), the first Piola–Kirchhoff
stress tensor P can be derived as:

                                     ∂Ψm           Nd Ns    ∂Aij
                               P=        − pF−T = ∑ ∑ wi         − pF−T ,                                  (6)
                                      ∂F          i =1 j =1
                                                             ∂F

where p denotes the Lagrange multiplier to guarantee incompressibility of the material. To train
the model, a cost function should be derived to quantify prediction error against experimental
observations on collective sample behavior, e.g., uni-axial tensile test provides the 1D dataset S = [ P̃, λ̃],
with nominal stress P̃ and stretch λ̃ in the direction of principal stretch. Here, the error has been
quantified using least-square method by writing:
                                                                             2
                                      1         Nd Ns    ∂ψj di
                             E ( W ) = ∑ g 1 ( ∑ ∑ wi              − T
                                                                − pF )g1 − Pn  ,                           (7)
                                      2 n =1   i =1 j =1
                                                          ∂F
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                          9 of 20



where P(1,1) := g1 Pg1 is the first component of the experimental macro-scale stress tensor P in loading
direction g1 .
     Neural network L-agents: Artificial neurons, also known as nodes, are the basic units in the
neural system, which receive and transfer information to the other nodes through activation functions.
Accordingly, the ability of “learning” of an ANN agent strongly depends on proper selection of the
activation function for each node. Their purpose is to decide whether a neuron should be activated or
not and introduce non-linearity into the output of a node. Therefore, they make the model to generalize
or adapt to a variety of data and to differentiate between the output. The cost function is accounted for
by estimating W using gradient descent (GD) algorithm, which gradually optimizes the initial guess
towards the target values.
     Material with full or recent memory: For history-dependent materials, parameters should be
specifically chosen to represent material memory and then fed into the L-agents through internal
parameters. However, different types of memory parameters may be required for describing different
materials, e.g., for materials with recent memory such as visco-elastic materials, internal parameters
should transfer information from each iteration to the next. In contrast, for materials with full memory
such as elastomers, the internal parameters can be defined independent of the solution iterations as a
damage-precursor of the external events, for example the maximum stretch in rubber material can be
used as a damage precursor to show the history of maximum loading in each direction.

4. Implementation to Rubber Inelasticity
     To show the performance of the proposed model, inelastic behavior of rubber has been studied.
The number of teams and their associated agents can be chosen based on the trade-off between accuracy
and computational cost. Here, we choose 21 teams, each with two agents, which is a relatively small
number [53] (21 integration-points discussed in Appendixs A–C). The inputs and internal parameters
of L-agents are designed to capture the rubbers’ deformation with full memory through λ j−max
parameters. To enable teams to predict different states of deformation, each team should be provided
with the first and second invariants of deformation [55]. The condition is satisfied by providing input
     d      d      di                         di     di   di
set S1i = [λ1 i ; λ1− max ] to L-agent 1 and S2 = [ λ2 ; λ2−max ] to L-agent 2
                                                                          p
                                 λ1 di =                       λ 2 di =
                                             p
                                                 di Cdi ,                      di C−1 di ,      C = FT F            (8)

where λ1 di and λ2 di are designed to lead to the first and second sub-elements and represent the I1 and
I2 , respectively. For the ANN structure of L-agents, we consider one input layer, one hidden layer with
four neurons and three activation functions soft plus (ψ(•) = ln(1 + e• )), sinusoid (ψ(•) = sin(•))
and hyperbolic tangent (ψ(•) = tanh(•)). In summary, we represented the rubber matrix by the
cooperative game of 21 teams of 2 agents through Aij , i ∈ {1, 21} , j ∈ {1, 2}. The final cost function
after agent fusion is given by:

                                                   1              21 2    ∂Aij ∂λ j di
                            E ( W1 , W2 ) =          ∑
                                                   2 n =1
                                                          [g 1 ( ∑ ∑ wi
                                                                          ∂λ j di ∂F
                                                                                       − pF−T )g1 − Pn ]2 ,         (9)
                                                                i =1 j =1

subjected to weights related to λ1−max and λ2−max ⩽ 0, and weights related to λ1 and λ2 ⩾ 0 to
satisfy thermodynamic consistency and polyconvexity, respectively. Equations (10) and (11) show the
derivation of each sub-element’s energy with respect to deformation gradient. Accordingly, Figure 3
shows the schematic concept of the derived model.

                                    21       ∂A1i ∂λ1 di     21   ∂A1i 1
                                    ∑ wi     ∂λ1 di ∂F
                                                         = ∑ i ∂λ di λ di F (di ⊗ di ).
                                                                w                                                 (10)
                                   i =1                    i =1    1   1

                          21        ∂Ai ∂λ2 di               21      ∂A2i        1
                          ∑ wi ∂λ d2i ∂F               = − ∑ wi
                                                                    ∂λ2   di
                                                                               λ2 di
                                                                                       F−1 F−T F−1 (di ⊗ di ).    (11)
                          i =1           2                  i =1
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                     10 of 20



4.1. Minimizing Data Requirement for Training

4.1.1. Dataset Minimization
     A critical step in the selection of the training dataset is to understand the role of the training
points and assure their quality in the model predictions. Too little data may provide a false sense of
confidence by preventing us from seeing the critical points, while low-quality data may provide faulty
results which seems perfectly robust. For example, in the aforementioned model developed for rubber,
                                                                                       d        d
we have introduced two L-agent types which represents two sub-elements using S1i and S2i input
                                                         d
sets, respectively. In view of the definition of S2i , we know that it has a limited variation in uni-axial
tensile loading which makes the contribution of the second L-agent almost limited in such loading.
               d
However, S2i significantly varies in bi-axial loading, which makes the contribution of second L-agent
quite considerable in this case. Therefore, training with uni-axial data cannot provide the quality
information needed for confidently training both agents since second-agent cannot be fully engaged.
      In essence, we cannot train agents with the scenarios that they are not participating in or have minimal
contribution. Thus, the confidence in training of agents is directly correlated to the quality of the training data,
and the contribution of agents in those scenarios.However, by defining the quality of data with respect to
the input required by each agent, we can quantify the confidence interval in which an agent can be
trained with high confidence with respect to the provided data.
      The confidence interval of a system is equal to that of its agent with least confidence.
The confidence of an agent can be calculated with respect to the deformation range used in each
direction for training of that agent. Since the reliability of the predictions of each agent is related to
its training, we can linearly correlate the agent’s reliability to their training range. As an example,
in case of uni-axial tension where the sample is stretched until χ x , maximum first deformation state
(axial) is χ x which occurs in the loading direction, and minimum is √1χx , which occurs in the transverse
                                                                              √
directions. Similarly, the training domain for the second agent is [ χ1x , χ x ]. In case of bi-axial tension,
range of agents deformations are [ χ12 , χbi. ] and [ χ1 , χ2bi. ].
                                          bi.                bi.
     If we train the model based on uni-axial tensile data until χ x , the model can predict different
states of deformation based the ranges that the model has been calibrated based on that. In order to
ensure accurate prediction of the model, the prediction ranges should be in the range that agent is
trained. Thus, in the bi-axial prediction case, the model limits to
                                                "            # 
                                                                                   √
                                                                        
                                                   1              1
                          Agent 1:                  2
                                                       , χbi. ∈ √ , χ x −→ χbi. ≤ 4 χ x
                                                  χbi.             χx
                                                                 1 √               √
                                                                     
                                                   1      2
                          Agent 2:                    ,χ      ∈    , χ x −→ χbi. ≤ 4 χ x .                     (12)
                                                  χbi. bi.      χx

     As it can be seen in Equation (12), these two ranges result into a same confidence interval for
the agents. Accordingly, considering one of these agents confidence interval would be sufficient to
calculate the network reliability. Likewise, these training/prediction domains can be calculated for
different cases of training and predictions with different states of deformation, see Table 1. To show the
confidence interval, we explore five different training datasets and their resulting agents. Using two
sets of experiments for the training purpose can increase the predictability range of the model as
each of the experiments can be activated in different ranges and agents. Note that the model may
extrapolate and predict more than the confidence interval but that is not necessarily accurate.
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                  11 of 20



                              Table 1. Prediction domain for train until stretch χ.

                   Training
                               Uni. 1 Tensile    Bi. 2    Pure Shear       Uni. Comp. 3   Plane Strain Comp.
     Prediction
         Uni. Tensile                 χ            χ            χ                √1               1
                                                                                   χ              χ
                                     √                         √
               Bi.                   4 χ           χ           4 χ               √1               1
                                                                                   χ              χ
         Pure Shear                   χ            χ            χ                √1               1
                                                                                   χ              χ
            Uni. Comp.               √1            1            1
                                                                                 χ                χ
                                       χ           χ2           χ
       Plane Strain Comp.            √1            1            1
                                                                                 χ                χ
                                       χ           χ2           χ
                                      1. Uniaxial; 2. Biaxial; 3. Compression.


1.    Training with uni-axial only vs. bi-axial only. Mars dataset which has three modes of pure shear,
      uni-axial, and bi-axial tensile tests have been used [56]. In first case, the model is trained by bi-axial
      data only until χ = 1.65 and validated against other modes (see Figure 5a). Confidence interval
      in uni-axial and pure shear predictions is also limited to χ = 1.65.
      In the second case, the model is trained by uni-axial data only until χ = 2.18 and validated
      against other modes (see Figure 5b). Confidence interval in shear will be limited to χ = 2.18 but
      in bi-axial will be dramatically reduced to χ = 1.21 due to the uncertainty in training L-agent 2.
2.    Training with uni-axial only over a long range. Here, we showed that we can improve the
      confidence interval of one agent not only by choosing the games in which it has high contribution,
      but also by increasing the length of the game in which one agent has small contribution. In essence,
      we can have a short game with high contribution, or long game with low contribution. In case of rubber,
      uni-axial tension is a game in which the 2nd L-agent has a low contribution. Therefore, here we
      show that for a sufficiently long game (uni-axial until χ = 7.7), we can increase the confidence
      interval for the second L-agent (bi-axial until χ = 1.66), see Figure 5c Treloar dataset which has
      three modes of pure shear, uni-axial, and bi-axial tensile tests that have been used [57].
3.    Training with uni-axial tension and compression. Here, we showed that we can improve the
      confidence interval by using multiple games to train the agents. So, here the model is trained
      by uni-axial tensile (till χ = 3.7) and compression data (till χ = 0.4). The confidence in training
      of the 1st L-agent is mainly defined by the uni-axial tensile test while that of the 2nd L-agent is
      formed by compression test. The predictions of the trained agents were validated against other
      modes (see Figure 5d), and as expected confidence interval in bi-axial until χ = 1.58 and pure
      shear predictions is also limited to χ = 3.7. Heuillet dataset with three modes of pure shear,
      uni-axial and bi-axial tensile tests have been used for training/validation [58].

4.1.2. Accuracy within Confidence Interval
     The proposed engine shows exceptional accuracy within the confidence interval which is
comparable to some of the most comprehensive and most expensive knowledge-based models.
We have shown the predictions of the models against different sets of data provided by Uramaya [59]
and Mars [56], where the models were trained using bi-axial tests only, see Figure 6. Bi-axial tests were
chosen to provide the longest confidence interval for other modes (see Table 1).
     To show the performance of the proposed model, we compared the relative error of our
model in fitting and predicting Treloar’s dataset with the non-affine micro-sphere model [60],
WYPiWYG model [23], and network averaging tube model [61]. Note that the error reported for
the non-affine micro-sphere model and network averaging tube models is fitting error not prediction
error, since they have used all three uni-axial, bi-axial, and pure shear at the same time in their
published results.
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12 of 20



                                                                Training with bi-axial only till 1.65                                                                       Training with uniaxial only till 2.18
                              (a) 7                                                                                                      (b) 12
                                                                  Experimental data - Biaxial                                                                                    Experimental data - Biaxial
                                                   6              Experimental data - Shear
                                                                                                                                                                  10             Experimental data - Shear



                           Nominal Stress [Mpa]




                                                                                                                                           Nominal Stress [Mpa]
                                                                  Experimental data - Uniaxial                                                                                   Experimental data - Uniaxial
                                                   5              Training                                                                                                       Training
                                                                  Prediction                                                                                      8              Prediction
                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                   2
                                                   1                                                                                                              2
                                                   0                                                                                                              0
                                                             1         1.2         1.4 1.6 1.8                 2   2.2                                                      1        1.2        1.4        1.6 1.8              2        2.2
                                                                                      Stretch                                                                                                             Stretch


                        (c) 7
                                                             Training with uniaxial only till 7.7                                      (d) Training with uniaxial tension + compression
                                                                 Experimental data - Biaxial
                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                   6




                                                                                                                                          Nominal Stress [Mpa]
                        Nominal Stress [Mpa]




                                                                 Experimental data - Shear
                                                                 Experimental data - Uniaxial
                                                   5             Training                                                                                         1
                                                                 Prediction
                                                   4
                                                   3                                                                                                              0                                   Experimental data - Biaxial
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Experimental data - Shear
                                                   2                                                                                                              -1                                  Experimental data - Uniaxial Tension
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Experimental data - Uniaxial Compression
                                                   1                                                                                                                                                  Training
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Prediction
                                                   0                                                                                                              -2
                                                            1        2         3        4     5        6       7   8                                                       0.5       1       1.5        2 2.5              3      3.5        4
                                                                                        Stretch                                                                                                        Stretch

      Figure 5. Model training and prediction with (a) bi-axial tension training (filled natural rubber),
      (b) uni-axial tension training (dataset [56]), (c) uni-axial tension training (Treloar’s dataset [57]),
      (d) uni-axial tension and compression training (dataset [58]).

                                                            Training with only bi-axial till 2.6                                                                                Training with only bi-axial till 1.65
               (a) 7                               7

                                                           Experimental data-Biaxial
                                                                                                                          (b) 7
                                         6                                                                                                               6
            Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                                                                                          Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                   6
                                                           Experimental data-Shear
                                               5   5       Experimental data-Uniaxial                                                                      5
                                                           Training
                                         4         4
                                                           Prediction                                                                                    4
                                         3         3                                                                                                     3                                                      Experimental data-Biaxial
                                         2         2                                                                                                    2                                                       Experimental data-Shear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Experimental data-Uniaxial
                                          1        1                                                                                                      1                                                     Training
                                         0                                                                                                                                                                      Prediction
                                                   0                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                       1         1.2          1.4          1.6        1.8            2           2.2
                                                       1           1.5              2            2.5       3        3.5
                                                                                      Stretch                                                                                                            Stretch
      Figure 6. Model training and prediction of uni-axial, bi-axial, and pure shear: (a) Urayama’s dataset [59]
      and (b) Mars’s dataset [56].

     Although, the proposed model and WYPiWYG model use uni-axial data for training and
predicting other states of deformation. Thus, results show the excellent performance of our model;
however, the proposed model is not complicated and as data-dependent as other physics-based models
(see Table 2).

                                                       Table 2. Relative error for several well-known models for Treloar’s dataset.

 Model Type                                                        AI                             Phenomenological                                                                                   Micro-Mechanical
                                                                                                                                                                        Non-affine                                               Network averaging
                                                   Proposed model                                WYPiWYG model [23]
                                                                                                                                                                  micro-sphere model [60]                                         tube model [61]
   Error(%)                                                       1.12                                     5.26                                                                          0.93                                                     2.11
                                                                                                                                                                  Uni-axial + Pure shear                                       Uni-axial + Pure shear
  Training Set                                              Uni-axial                                  Uni-axial
                                                                                                                                                                        + Bi-axial                                                   + Bi-axial
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13 of 20



     The compression behavior of rubber-like material is another aspect that plays an essential role in
industrial applications. We trained the model with the dataset of uni-axial compression experiments
and predicted the behavior of plane strain compression. Figure 7 shows the performance of the
proposed model for compression tests. The error in training and prediction of the proposed model for
Arruda–Boyce data is 0.73%, which compared to the non-affine micro-sphere model, which has 1.29%
error, shows a significant performance of our less complicated model.

                                                                                                                  Training with uniaxial compression till 0.14
                                                                                              5
                                                                                              0
                                                                    Nominal Stress [Mpa]   -5
                                                                                           -10
                                                                                           -15
                                                                                           -20                                     Experimental data - Uniaxial Compression
                                                                                                                                  Experimental data - Plane Strain Compression
                                                                                           -25                                    Training
                                                                                                                                  Prediction
                                                                                           -30
                                                                                                                  0.1      0.3             0.5         0.7          0.9
                                                                                                                                           Stretch

      Figure 7. Model training with uni-axial compression and prediction of plane strain compression
      (Arruda–Boyce’s dataset [62]).

4.1.3. Damage Prediction and Deformation History
     To further investigate the performance of the proposed model in material with full memory,
we predicted the inelastic features in the behavior of filled elastomer, namely Mullins effect and
permanent set. Figure 8 shows stress–stretch curves for this cross-linked polymer with experimental
data of [59]. We used one set of bi-axial loading-unloading until χ = 2.7 for training and predicting
inelastic effects in different states of deformation, e.g., uni-axial and pure shear at increasing stretch
amplitudes which constitutes deformation histories.

                              7                                                                                   6                                                                              5
                                      Experimental data - Biaxial                                                         Experimental data - Shear                                                      Experimental data - Uniaxial
                                                                                                                                                                          Nominal Stress [Mpa]




                              6
       Nominal Stress [Mpa]




                                                                                           Nominal Stress [Mpa]




                                      Training                                                                    5       Prediction                                                             4       Prediction
                              5       Prediction
                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                              4
                                                                                                                  3
                              3                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                  2
                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                              1                                                                                   1
                              0                                                                                   0                                                                              0

                                  1     1.4        1.8       2.2    2.6                                               1    1.5         2         2.5      3         3.5                              1     1.4        1.8    2.2        2.6   3

                                                   Stretch                                                                             Stretch                                                                         Stretch

      Figure 8. Model training and prediction of uni-axial, bi-axial, and pure shear (Urayama’s dataset [59]).

4.1.4. Convergence Outside of the Confidence Interval
      To investigate the convergence of the proposed model outside of the confidence interval,
prediction of the inelastic behavior on stretch amplitudes larger than the confidence interval was
illustrated on two different sets of experimental data on rubber, Itskov’s [63] and Zhong’s [64] dataset.
While we strongly recommend the users to stay within the confidence interval, the model prediction
accuracy outside of the confidence interval shows the relevance and reliability of the model in extreme
cases which is mainly a result of the constraints induced by the knowledge infused into the model.
Results indicated the trend and proposed model performance (Figures 9 and 10). Here, we gradually
reduce the confidence interval by using smaller ranges of training data to see the drop in quality
of predictions. As expected, despite accuracy reduction, there is no significant change in the model
predictions profile which is not usually the case for extrapolation methods. In Figure 9a, we trained
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14 of 20



the model with the largest amplitude. As we expected, the error in training and prediction is 4.6%.
As we reduce the amplitude of training in Figure 9, we see that the error has increased generally.
There is an instability in the errors and overestimating in Figure 9b,c, which come from numerical
simplification and choosing the same neural network structures and activation functions for different
sets of data for training. The important point is that we want to show that the model is accurate for
different modes of training. To ensure our result is general for different elastomers, we did the same
training procedure for another dataset (Figure 10). The result shows the same results as the last dataset.


             (a)                                                                                                                                                           (b) 6
                                                                  Experimental Data - Uniaxial                                                                                                                         Experimental Data - Uniaxial
                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                          Nominal Stress [MPa]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Training
                                                                  Training                                                                                                                           5
           Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                                  Prediction                                                                                                                                           Prediction

                                        3                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                      Error: 4.6%                                                                                                                                                      Error: 4.3%
                                  0                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                             1                  1.2               1.4                 1.6                                  1.8                                                 1                                1.2                   1.4              1.6                   1.8
                                                                                                 Stretch                                                                                                                                                             Stretch


       (c) 6                                                                                                                                                      (d)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                 Experimental Data - Uniaxial                                                                                                                          Experimental Data - Uniaxial
                                                                                                                                                                  Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                                 Training                                                                                                                                              Training
                                  5
       Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                                 Prediction                                                                                                                      4                     Prediction

                                  4                                                                                                                                                              3
                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                  2
                                  1                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                    Error: 6.5%                                                                                                                                                        Error: 6.3%
                                  0                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                             1                  1.2              1.4                 1.6                              1.8                                                 1                             1.2                           1.4              1.6                   1.8
                                                                                                Stretch                                                                                                                                                              Stretch

      Figure 9. Model training and prediction of cyclic uni-axial tension with step-wise increasing of
      amplitude (Itskov’s dataset [63]).


                                      (a) 4                                                                             (b)                                                                                                           (c) 4
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                   Training                                                                          Training                                                                                                  Training
                                                                                                                      Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Prediction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                                   Prediction                                                                        Prediction
                                  Nominal Stress [MPa]




                                                         3                                                                                   3                                                                                                         3


                                                         2                                                                                   2                                                                                                         2


                                                         1                                                                                   1                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                Error: 2.9%                                                                                               Error: 2.8%                                                                   Error: 5.11%
                                                         0                                                                                   0                                                                                                         0   0




                                                             1     1.5     2      2.5      3    3.5   4       4.5                                1   1.5     2       2.5                         3       3.5       4      4.5                              1   1.5     2    2.5    3    3.5    4       4.5
                                                                                      Stretch                                                                               Stretch                                                                                          Stretch


      Figure 10. Model training and prediction of cyclic uni-axial tension with step-wise increasing of
      amplitude (dataset [64]).

5. Conclusions
     A physics-informed data-driven constitutive model for cross-linked polymers is developed by
embedding neural networks into a multi-scale model. We propose a systematic approach to reduce the
order of the constitutive mapping by leveraging existing knowledge of polymer science, continuum
physics, and statistical mechanics. We use our model to predict the mechanical behavior of filled
elastomers. The results indicate that our model can easily capture multiple inelastic effects in the
behavior of the materials, is significantly less data-dependent, has lower dimensionality, and is
interpretable. To illustrate the superior performance of knowledge-driven models developed by this
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                    15 of 20



approach, its predictions are bench-marked against several experimental datasets. We compare the
stress responses from Treloar’s dataset in our model with several well-known models to show the
accuracy and simplicity of our model. In summary, our model provides a hyper-elastic constitutive
model which captures damage of polymer chains for cross-linked elastomers for quasi-static loading.
In the future, the proposed model can be further extended to include the effect of the deformation rate.
The modular platform nature of the proposed model allows the addition of such effects.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.G. V.M., and R.D.; methodology, A.G., V.M., and R.D.; software,
A.G.; validation, A.G.; formal analysis, A.G.; investigation, A.G., V.M.; resources, R.D.; data curation, A.G.;
writing—original draft preparation, A.G., V.M.; writing—review and editing, R.D.; visualization, A.G.; supervision,
R.D.; project administration, R.D.; funding acquisition, R.D. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Appendix A. Frame Independency
     Frame objectivity, during rigid body motion, requires strain energy of the material to remain
unchanged. Thus, the material response should not depend on the choice of the reference frame.
The strain energy frame independency can be written as

                                               Ψm (QF) = Ψm (F),                                             (A1)

where Q is the rotation tensor. Therefore, a constitutive law is frame independent if energy is left
rotationally invariant. The mentioned condition is satisfied when the strain energy is a function of the
right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor C, due to

                                   C+ = (F+ ) T F+ = F T Q T QF = F T F = C,                                 (A2)

which F+ = FQ. The proposed model is a function of right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor.
Therefore, the frame independency condition is satisfied automatically.

Appendix B. Thermodynamic Consistency

Appendix B.1. Polyconvexity
     Polyconvexity is one of the known conditions which ensure the thermodynamic consistency. In this
section, we briefly describe sufficient but not necessary free energy function conditions which guarantee
the existence of minimizers of some variational principles. In order to understand polyconvexity, we start
with some properties of convexity. Consider that Ψm (F) is the strain energy function on set of K. We can
say Ψm (F) is convex on set of K if hessian matrix of Ψm (F) be positive in that set.

                                             D2 Ψm (F). ( H, H ) ⩾ 0,                                        (A3)

and for proof of polyconvexity, we can mention that F → Ψm (F) is polyconvex if and only if there
exists a function G such that
                                           Ψm (F) = G (F, adjF, detF) ,                                      (A4)
                                                          F −1
and the function G is convex. In addition, adjF = detF and the implication chain shows relations from
convexity to ellipticity.

                          convexity → polyconvexity → quasiconvexity → ellipticity
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                                                  16 of 20



      The Hessian matrix of the strain energy is positive if

                                           2                                   ~          ~
        ∂Ψm 2             Nd      ∂ψj di         Nd     ∂ANNj (Wj , λ j di , λ j max di )
                     = ∑ wi                    = ∑ wi                                             > 0,     f or j = 1, 2, ..., Ns ,        (A5)
        ∂ 2 λ j di      i =1      ∂ 2 λ j di    i =1                   ∂λ j di

     If weights, which connect the input of λ j to other neurons, are positive, the proposed model holds
the condition of polyconvexity.

Appendix B.2. Second Law of Thermodynamic
     As a result that all of the constitutive models should satisfy the second law of thermodynamic,
the satisfaction of this law should be checked for the proposed model. On the other hand,
checking Clausius–Duhem inequality would be enough for this. As a result that λ j max is an internal
variable in the strain energy function of cross-linked polymers, we can reduce the second law of
thermodynamics to Clausius–Duhem inequality that shows thermodynamic consistency of the model
in direction di . This inequality can be written as

                                          ∂Ψm
                                                      ≤0               ∀d                f or j = 1, 2, ..., Ns ,                          (A6)
                                      ∂λ jmax di

If we consider the energy of matrix as

                                                                 Nd Ns    
                                                           Ψ m = ∑ ∑ ψ j di w i ,                                                          (A7)
                                                                   i =1 j =1

which
                                                       d                            ~         ~
                                                       ψj = ANNj (Wj , λ j di , λ j max di ),                                              (A8)

thus, Clausius–Duhem can be written as


                                                                               ~          ~
     ∂Ψm             Nd          ∂ψj di          Nd     ∂ANNj (Wj , λ j di , λ j max di )
                = ∑ wi                         = ∑ wi                                             ≤ 0,              f or j = 1, 2, ..., Ns , (A9)
  ∂λ j max di        i =1      ∂λ j max di      i =1               ∂λ j max di

     If weights that connect the input of λ j max to other neurons are negative, the proposed model holds
the condition of thermodynamic consistency.

Appendix C. Integration Point of Micro-Sphere Approach

                               Table A1. Integration points and weighting factors of the unit-sphere.

                          i           d i (1)                d i (2)                    d i (3)                 wi
                          1           0.0                     0.0                        1.0             0.0265214244093
                          2           0.0                     1.0                        0.0             0.0265214244093
                          3           1.0                     0.0                        0.0             0.0265214244093
                          4           0.0               0.707106781187             0.707106781187        0.0199301476312
                          5           0.0               0.707106781187             0.707106781187        0.0199301476312
                          6     0.707106781187                0.0                  0.707106781187        0.0199301476312
                          7     0.707106781187                0.0                  0.707106781187        0.0199301476312
                          8     0.707106781187          0.707106781187                   0.0             0.0199301476312
                          9     0.707106781187          0.707106781187                   0.0             0.0199301476312
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                             17 of 20



                                                     Table A1. Cont.

                    i         d i (1)              d i (2)              d i (3)               wi
                   10     0.836095596749     0.387907304067       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   11     0.836095596749     0.387907304067       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   12     0.836095596749     0.387907304067       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   13     0.836095596749     0.387907304067       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   14     0.387907304067     0.836095596749       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   15     0.387907304067     0.836095596749       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   16     0.387907304067     0.836095596749       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   17     0.387907304067     0.836095596749       0.387907304067       0.0250712367487
                   18     0.387907304067     0.387907304067       0.836095596749       0.0250712367487
                   19     0.387907304067     0.387907304067       0.836095596749       0.0250712367487
                   20     0.387907304067     0.387907304067       0.836095596749       0.0250712367487
                   21     0.387907304067     -0.387907304067      0.836095596749       0.0250712367487


References
1.    Farhangi, V.; Karakouzian, M.; Geertsema, M. Effect of Micropiles on Clean Sand Liquefaction Risk Based
      on CPT and SPT. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 3111. [CrossRef]
2.    Farhangi, V.; Karakouzian, M. Effect of fiber reinforced polymer tubes filled with recycled materials and
      concrete on structural capacity of pile foundations. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 1554. [CrossRef]
3.    Izadi, A.; Anthony, R.J. A plasma-based gas-phase method for synthesis of gold nanoparticles. Plasma Proc. Polym.
      2019, 16, e1800212. [CrossRef]
4.    Sinha, M.; Izadi, A.; Anthony, R.; Roccabianca, S. A novel approach to finding mechanical properties of
      nanocrystal layers. Nanoscale 2019, 11, 7520–7526. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Izadi, A.; Toback, B.; Sinha, M.; Millar, A.; Bigelow, M.; Roccabianca, S.; Anthony, R. Mechanical and Optical
      Properties of Stretchable Silicon Nanocrystal/Polydimethylsiloxane Nanocomposites. Phys. Status Solidi (a)
      2020, 217, 2000015. [CrossRef]
6.    Marckmann, G.; Verron, E. Comparison of hyperelastic models for rubber-like materials. Rubber Chem. Technol.
      2006, 79, 835–858. [CrossRef]
7.    Steinmann, P.; Hossain, M.; Possart, G. Hyperelastic models for rubber-like materials: Consistent tangent
      operators and suitability for Treloar’s data. Arch. Appl. Mech. 2012, 82, 1183–1217. [CrossRef]
8.    Shojaeifard, M.; Sheikhi, S.; Baniassadi, M.; Baghani, M. On finite bending of visco-hyperelastic materials:
      A novel analytical solution and FEM. Acta Mech. 2020, 231, 3435–3450. [CrossRef]
9.    Shojaeifard, M.; Baghani, M.; Shahsavari, H. Rutting investigation of asphalt pavement subjected to moving
      cyclic loads: An implicit viscoelastic–viscoplastic–viscodamage FE framework. Int. J. Pavement Eng. 2020,
      21, 1393–1407. [CrossRef]
10.   Liu, W.K.; Karniakis, G.; Tang, S.; Yvonnet, J. A Computational Mechanics Special Issue on: Data-Driven Modeling
      and Simulation—Theory, Methods, and Applications; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019.
11.   Montáns, F.J.; Chinesta, F.; Gómez-Bombarelli, R.; Kutz, J.N. Data-driven modeling and learning in science
      and engineering. CR Mécanique 2019, 347, 845–855. [CrossRef]
12.   Lu, X.; Giovanis, D.G.; Yvonnet, J.; Papadopoulos, V.; Detrez, F.; Bai, J. A data-driven computational
      homogenization method based on neural networks for the nonlinear anisotropic electrical response of
      graphene/polymer nanocomposites. Comput. Mech. 2019, 64, 307–321. [CrossRef]
13.   Chen, G.; Li, T.; Chen, Q.; Ren, S.; Wang, C.; Li, S. Application of deep learning neural network to identify collision
      load conditions based on permanent plastic deformation of shell structures. Comput. Mech. 2019, 64, 435–449.
      [CrossRef]
14.   Vahidi-Moghaddam, A.; Mazouchi, M.; Modares, H. Memory-augmented system identification with
      finite-time convergence. IEEE Control Syst. Lett. 2020, 5, 571–576. [CrossRef]
15.   Tamhidi, A.; Kuehn, N.; Ghahari, S.F.; Taciroglu, E.; Bozorgnia, Y. Conditioned Simulation of Ground Motion
      Time Series using Gaussian Process Regression. engrXiv 2020. [CrossRef]
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                           18 of 20



16.   Bock, F.E.; Aydin, R.C.; Cyron, C.J.; Huber, N.; Kalidindi, S.R.; Klusemann, B. A review of the application of
      machine learning and data mining approaches in continuum materials mechanics. Front. Mater. 2019, 6, 110.
      [CrossRef]
17.   Kirchdoerfer, T.; Ortiz, M. Data-driven computational mechanics. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2016,
      304, 81–101. [CrossRef]
18.   Nguyen, L.T.K.; Keip, M.A. A data-driven approach to nonlinear elasticity. Comput. Struct. 2018, 194, 97–115.
      [CrossRef]
19.   Leygue, A.; Coret, M.; Réthoré, J.; Stainier, L.; Verron, E. Data-based derivation of material response.
      Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2018, 331, 184–196. [CrossRef]
20.   Stainier, L.; Leygue, A.; Ortiz, M. Model-free data-driven methods in mechanics: Material data identification
      and solvers. Comput. Mech. 2019, 64, 381–393. [CrossRef]
21.   Kanno, Y. Mixed-integer programming formulation of a data-driven solver in computational elasticity.
      Optim. Lett. 2019, 13, 1505–1514. [CrossRef]
22.   Breitkopf, P.; Coelho, R.F. Multidisciplinary Design Optimization in Computational Mechanics; John Wiley &
      Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2013.
23.   Amores, V.J.; Benítez, J.M.; Montáns, F.J. Average-chain behavior of isotropic incompressible polymers
      obtained from macroscopic experimental data. A simple structure-based WYPiWYG model in Julia language.
      Adv. Eng. Softw. 2019, 130, 41–57. [CrossRef]
24.   Ibanez, R.; Abisset-Chavanne, E.; Aguado, J.V.; Gonzalez, D.; Cueto, E.; Chinesta, F. A manifold learning
      approach to data-driven computational elasticity and inelasticity. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 2018, 25, 47–57.
      [CrossRef]
25.   Ibañez, R.; Borzacchiello, D.; Aguado, J.V.; Abisset-Chavanne, E.; Cueto, E.; Ladevèze, P.; Chinesta, F. Data-driven
      non-linear elasticity: Constitutive manifold construction and problem discretization. Comput. Mech. 2017,
      60, 813–826. [CrossRef]
26.   Amores, V.J.; Benítez, J.M.; Montáns, F.J. Data-driven, structure-based hyperelastic manifolds: A macro-micro-
      macro approach to reverse-engineer the chain behavior and perform efficient simulations of polymers.
      Comput. Struct. 2020, 231, 106209. [CrossRef]
27.   Ibáñez, R.; Abisset-Chavanne, E.; González, D.; Duval, J.L.; Cueto, E.; Chinesta, F. Hybrid constitutive
      modeling: Data-driven learning of corrections to plasticity models. Int. J. Mater. Form. 2019, 12, 717–725.
      [CrossRef]
28.   Latorre, M.; Montáns, F.J. WYPiWYG hyperelasticity without inversion formula: Application to passive
      ventricular myocardium. Comput. Struct. 2017, 185, 47–58. [CrossRef]
29.   Miñano, M.; Montáns, F.J. WYPiWYG damage mechanics for soft materials: A data-driven approach.
      Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 2018, 25, 165–193. [CrossRef]
30.   Bhattacharjee, S.; Matouš, K. A nonlinear manifold-based reduced order model for multiscale analysis of
      heterogeneous hyperelastic materials. J. Comput. Phys. 2016, 313, 635–653. [CrossRef]
31.   Fritzen, F.; Kunc, O. Two-stage data-driven homogenization for nonlinear solids using a reduced order
      model. Eur. J. Mech. A/Solids 2018, 69, 201–220. [CrossRef]
32.   Reimann, D.; Chandra, K.; Vajragupta, N.; Glasmachers, T.; Junker, P.; Hartmaier, A. Modeling macroscopic
      material behavior with machine learning algorithms trained by micromechanical simulations. Front. Mater.
      2019, 6, 181. [CrossRef]
33.   Wang, K.; Sun, W.; Du, Q. A cooperative game for automated learning of elasto-plasticity knowledge graphs
      and models with AI-guided experimentation. Comput. Mech. 2019, 64, 467–499. [CrossRef]
34.   Stoffel, M.; Bamer, F.; Markert, B. Neural network based constitutive modeling of nonlinear viscoplastic
      structural response. Mech. Res. Commun. 2019, 95, 85–88. [CrossRef]
35.   Kopal, I.; Labaj, I.; Harničárová, M.; Valíček, J.; Hrubỳ, D. Prediction of the tensile response of carbon black
      filled rubber blends by artificial neural network. Polymers 2018, 10, 644. [CrossRef]
36.   Zopf, C.; Kaliske, M. Numerical characterisation of uncured elastomers by a neural network based approach.
      Comput. Struct. 2017, 182, 504–525. [CrossRef]
37.   Raissi, M.; Perdikaris, P.; Karniadakis, G.E. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework
      for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. J. Comput. Phys.
      2019, 378, 686–707. [CrossRef]
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                    19 of 20



38.   Haghighat, E.; Raissi, M.; Moure, A.; Gomez, H.; Juanes, R. A deep learning framework for solution and
      discovery in solid mechanics: Linear elasticity. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2003.02751.
39.   Xu, K.; Tartakovsky, A.M.; Burghardt, J.; Darve, E. Inverse Modeling of Viscoelasticity Materials using
      Physics Constrained Learning. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2005.04384.
40.   Ghaderi, A.; Morovati, V.; Dargazany, R. A Bayesian Surrogate Constitutive Model to Estimate Failure
      Probability of Rubber-Like Materials. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2010.13241.
41.   Tooranjipour, P.; Vatankhah, R.; Arefi, M.M. Prescribed performance adaptive fuzzy dynamic surface control
      of nonaffine time-varying delayed systems with unknown control directions and dead-zone input. Int. J.
      Adapt. Control Signal Proc. 2019, 33, 1134–1156. [CrossRef]
42.   Jung, S.; Ghaboussi, J. Neural network constitutive model for rate-dependent materials. Comput. Struct.
      2006, 84, 955–963. [CrossRef]
43.   Mullins, L. Softening of rubber by deformation. Rubber Chem. Technol. 1969, 42, 339–362. [CrossRef]
44.   Bahrololoumi, A.; Morovati, V.; Poshtan, E.A.; Dargazany, R. A multi-physics constitutive model to predict
      quasi-static behaviour: Hydrolytic aging in thin cross-linked polymers. Int. J. Plast. 2020, 130, 102676.
      [CrossRef]
45.   Bueche, F. Molecular basis for the Mullins effect. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1960, 4, 107–114. [CrossRef]
46.   Hanson, D.E.; Hawley, M.; Houlton, R.; Chitanvis, K.; Rae, P.; Orler, E.B.; Wrobleski, D.A. Stress softening
      experiments in silica-filled polydimethylsiloxane provide insight into a mechanism for the Mullins effect.
      Polymer 2005, 46, 10989–10995. [CrossRef]
47.   Houwink, R. Slipping of molecules during the deformation of reinforced rubber. Rubber Chem. Technol. 1956,
      29, 888–893. [CrossRef]
48.   Kraus, G.; Childers, C.; Rollmann, K. Stress softening in carbon black-reinforced vulcanizates. Strain rate
      and temperature effects. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1966, 10, 229–244. [CrossRef]
49.   Dalémat, M.; Coret, M.; Leygue, A.; Verron, E. Measuring stress field without constitutive equation.
      Mech. Mater. 2019, 136, 103087. [CrossRef]
50.   Truesdell, C. The Elements of Continuum Mechanics: Lectures given in August-September 1965 for the Department
      of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Syracuse University Syracuse, New York; Springer Science & Business
      Media: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
51.   Holzapfel, G.A.; Gasser, T.C.; Ogden, R.W. A new constitutive framework for arterial wall mechanics and a
      comparative study of material models. J. Elast. the Phys. Sci. Solids 2000, 61, 1–48.
52.   Hartmann, S.; Neff, P. Polyconvexity of generalized polynomial-type hyperelastic strain energy functions for
      near-incompressibility. Int. J. Solids Struct. 2003, 40, 2767–2791. [CrossRef]
53.   Bažant, P.; Oh, B. Efficient numerical integration on the surface of a sphere. ZAMM-J. Appl. Math. Mech./ Z.
      für Angew. Math. Mech. 1986, 66, 37–49. [CrossRef]
54.   Dargazany, R.; Khiem, V.N.; Itskov, M. A generalized network decomposition model for the quasi-static
      inelastic behavior of filled elastomers. Int. J. Plast. 2014, 63, 94–109. [CrossRef]
55.   Lambert-Diani, J.; Rey, C. New phenomenological behavior laws for rubbers and thermoplastic elastomers.
      Eur. J. Mech. A/Solids 1999, 18, 1027–1043. [CrossRef]
56.   Mars, W.; Fatemi, A. Observations of the constitutive response and characterization of filled natural rubber
      under monotonic and cyclic multiaxial stress states. J. Eng. Mater. Technol. 2004, 126, 19–28. [CrossRef]
57.   Treloar, L.R.G. The Physics of Rubber Elasticity; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1975.
58.   Heuillet, P.; Dugautier, L. Mod é lization of the hyper é elastic behavior of rubbers and é lastom é
      thermoplastic, compact or cellular. Mech. Eng. Rubbers Thermoplast. Elastomers 1997.
59.   Mai, T.T.; Morishita, Y.; Urayama, K. Novel features of the Mullins effect in filled elastomers revealed by
      stretching measurements in various geometries. Soft Matter 2017, 13, 1966–1977. [CrossRef]
60.   Miehe, C.; Göktepe, S.; Lulei, F. A micro-macro approach to rubber-like materials—part I: The non-affine
      micro-sphere model of rubber elasticity. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 2004, 52, 2617–2660. [CrossRef]
61.   Khiêm, V.N.; Itskov, M. Analytical network-averaging of the tube model: Rubber elasticity. J. Mech.
      Phys. Solids 2016, 95, 254–269. [CrossRef]
62.   Arruda, E.M.; Boyce, M.C. A three-dimensional constitutive model for the large stretch behavior of rubber
      elastic materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 1993, 41, 389–412. [CrossRef]
Polymers 2020, 12, 2628                                                                                     20 of 20



63.   Itskov, M.; Knyazeva, A. A rubber elasticity and softening model based on chain length statistics. Int. J.
      Solids Struct. 2016, 80, 512–519. [CrossRef]
64.   Zhong, D.; Xiang, Y.; Yin, T.; Yu, H.; Qu, S.; Yang, W. A physically-based damage model for soft elastomeric
      materials with anisotropic Mullins effect. Int. J. Solids Struct. 2019, 176, 121–134. [CrossRef]

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.

                           c 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                          article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                          (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
