                                       Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
                                                   ScienceDirect

                                   Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 398 (2022) 115248
                                                                                                                www.elsevier.com/locate/cma




       Data-driven tissue mechanics with polyconvex neural ordinary
                           differential equations
                  Vahidullah Taca , Francisco Sahli Costabalb ,∗, Adrian B. Tepolea,c ,∗∗
                               a School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
b Department of Mechanical and Metallurgical Engineering, School of Engineering, Institute for Biological and Medical Engineering, Schools of

                  Engineering, Medicine and Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
                          c Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA

                           Received 29 January 2022; received in revised form 5 May 2022; accepted 16 June 2022
                                                       Available online 13 July 2022




Graphical Abstract




Abstract
   Data-driven methods are becoming an essential part of computational mechanics due to their advantages over traditional
material modeling. Deep neural networks are able to learn complex material response without the constraints of closed-form
models. However, data-driven approaches do not a priori satisfy physics-based mathematical requirements such as polyconvexity,
a condition needed for the existence of minimizers for boundary value problems in elasticity. In this study, we use a
recent class of neural networks, neural ordinary differential equations (N-ODEs), to develop data-driven material models that
automatically satisfy polyconvexity of the strain energy. We take advantage of the properties of ordinary differential equations
to create monotonic functions that approximate the derivatives of the strain energy with respect to deformation invariants. The
monotonicity of the derivatives guarantees the convexity of the energy. The N-ODE material model is able to capture synthetic

 ∗ Corresponding author.
∗∗ Corresponding author at: School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
    E-mail address: abuganza@purdue.edu (A.B. Tepole).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2022.115248
0045-7825/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

data generated from closed-form material models, and it outperforms conventional models when tested against experimental
data on skin, a highly nonlinear and anisotropic material. We also showcase the use of the N-ODE material model in finite
element simulations of reconstructive surgery. The framework is general and can be used to model a large class of materials,
especially biological soft tissues. We therefore expect our methodology to further enable data-driven methods in computational
mechanics.
© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Keywords: Machine learning; Constitutive modeling; Nonlinear finite elements; Skin mechanics




1. Introduction
    The past two decades have witnessed the emergence of data-driven models for describing various engineering
systems and physical phenomena in wide ranging applications, from improving medical diagnosis [1], to weather
forecasting [2], energetic material property prediction [3], and turbulence modeling [4]. Data-driven methods such
as deep neural networks are becoming popular in materials science and materials engineering in applications such
as fatigue life prediction [5], identification of material parameters [6], systems identification [7], and constitutive
modeling [8–12].
    The notion of a free energy function, and the definition of the stress by differentiation of the free energy
with respect to the deformation lies at the core of nonlinear elasticity, from hyperelastic to energy dissipating
materials [13]. The stress, in turn, has to be a strongly elliptic function of the deformation gradient in order to
satisfy the existence of traveling waves with real wave speeds [14]. For hyperelastic materials, Morrey showed that
there exists a deformation field that minimizes the total potential energy if the strain energy density is a quasiconvex
function of the deformation gradient F with some additional growth conditions on this function [15]. In practice,
it is difficult to check the quasiconvexity condition. Instead, Ball showed that a reasonable requirement is the
polyconvexity of the strain energy density [16]. Polyconvexity implies quasiconvexity and is a stronger requirement
than quasiconvexity. Yet, it is still flexible enough to capture realistic materials. Convexity of the strain energy
density with respect to F would also guarantee the existence of minimizers for potential energy functionals, but
convexity with respect to F is not compatible with large deformation elasticity; this condition is too strong [17].
For example, convexity with respect to F is not compatible with the principle of frame indifference. Traditionally,
material model development has relied on expressing the strain energy as an explicit and differentiable analytical
function of the deformation [18–20]. The notion of polyconvexity has been an important factor in the development
of these closed-form material models [21]. In particular, advances in modeling of soft tissue material behavior has
prompted the development of nonlinear and anisotropic strain energies that satisfy polyconvexity [22].
    Selection of an appropriate expert-constructed material model for a specific material usually requires advanced
expertise and significant trial and error. There are a large number of models in the literature designed to fit different
families of materials. Even in specific fields such as skin mechanics there is no consensus on the choice of a
material model [23–25]. Furthermore, the analytical form of the strain energy function may be too restrictive for
many applications, resulting in poor prediction performance. Sensitivity with respect to parameters is another issue,
for instance when exponential models are used [26].
    A recent trend in material modeling has been the use of deep neural networks to describe either the strain
energy or its derivatives [9,12,27,28]. Neural networks of sufficient complexity can be used to learn, reproduce and
predict the behavior of any elastic material, which resolves many issues of expert-constructed models. However,
the convexity of the strain energy function in data-driven frameworks is usually ignored or enforced with additional
loss terms [9,12,27]. Using this approach does not guarantee the convexity of the strain energy. The penalty terms
will push the solution space to resemble that of a convex function in the training region. However, even if convexity
checks are satisfied exactly on all the training points, there is no guarantee that convexity extends outside the training
points, or beyond the boundaries of the training region. Furthermore, adding loss terms to ensure convexity adds
to the nonlinearity of the loss space which makes finding the global minimum a daunting task. These loss terms
also result in lengthy calculations during training and may limit the flexibility of the neural networks. Thus, there
is a need for data-driven methods that automatically satisfy the polyconvexity requirements but can still capture the
behavior of any material.
                                                                     2
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 1. Workflow of the training and inference processes in the N-ODE material model (left), continuous transformation of the hidden state
in the N-ODE from modified invariants H(0) = Ji , to the derivatives of the strain energy H(1) = Ψi (right).



   In this study we use a new type of neural networks known as neural ordinary differential equations (N-ODE) [29]
to estimate the derivatives of the strain energy function with respect to invariants of deformation. Polyconvexity
of the strain energy is automatically satisfied in our formulation. We train the N-ODEs using synthetic as well as
experimental stress–stretch data from porcine skin biaxial experiments obtained from [12]. Finally, we demonstrate
the applicability of the N-ODE material model in finite element simulations. The diagram in Fig. 1 shows an
overview of our methodology.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Construction of polyconvex strain energy functions

   As mentioned previously, we seek to satisfy the polyconvexity of the strain energy function since it is compatible
with large deformation hyperelasticity and, with additional growth conditions on the strain energy, guarantees the
existence of minimizers for the total potential energy [16,17,22,30]. A function Ψ (F) is polyconvex in F if there is a
function Ψ̂ with Ψ (F) = Ψ̂ (F, cofF, detF) such that Ψ̂ is convex on the extended domain formed by F, cofF, detF.
Constructing general functions that satisfy this requirement can be challenging, but a sufficiently flexible subset of
polyconvex functions of F can be obtained through an additive decomposition [31]
       Ψ (F) = ΨF (F) + Ψcof (cofF) + Ψdet (detF)                                                                                     (1)
with ΨF , Ψcof , Ψdet each a convex function. Furthermore, to guarantee objectivity of the strain energy, Ψ is usually
not expressed as a function of the full deformation gradient but instead of the right Cauchy Green deformation
C = F⊤ F. In that case the following form of the strain energy will retain polyconvexity with respect to F,
       Ψ (F) = Ψ I1 (I1 ) + Ψ I2 (I2 ) + Ψ J (J )                                                                                     (2)
provided Ψ I1 , Ψ I2 are convex non-decreasing
                                    √            functions of their respective arguments [31], with I1 , I2 the first two
invariants of C, and J = detF = detC. The reason why constructing a function based on (2) yields polyconvex
functions as expressed in (1) is because the invariants I1 , I2 of C are convex non-decreasing functions of F and
cofF, respectively. Explicitly, the invariants of C, I1 , I2 , are related to F, cof F,
     I1 = tr (C) = C : I,                                                                                   (3)
                       1 2
     I2 = tr (cof C) = [I1 − tr (C2 )].                                                                     (4)
                       2
  To consider anisotropy, additional pseudo-invariants need to be considered. A popular option is I4v = C : V0 ,
where V0 = v0 ⊗ v0 is a structural tensor defined by the anisotropy direction v0 , which usually corresponds to
                                                                    3
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

a fiber orientation in soft tissue in the reference configuration. It can be shown that I4v is a convex function
of F. Consequently, we can include additional terms that depend on I4v in the strain energy function retaining
polyconvexity while including the effects of anisotropy. We consider two different fiber directions I4v and I4w ,
corresponding to the vectors v0 and w0 in the reference configuration. Lastly, we note that since I1 , I4v , I4w are
convex functions of F, and I2 is convex with respect to cofF, we can compose convex non-decreasing functions of
linear combinations of these invariants and retain polyconvexity [22,31,32]. Here, we propose the following general
form of the strain energy function:
       Ψ (F) = Ψ I1 (I1 ) + Ψ I2 (I2 ) + Ψ I4v (I4v ) + Ψ I4w (I4w ) +
         ∑
             Ψ Ii ,I j αi j Ii + (1 − αi j )I j + Ψ J (J )
                      (                        )
                                                                                                                              (5)
            j>i

where the second to last term includes convex non-decreasing functions of all possible linear combinations of the
invariants introduced so far. The weights αi j are restricted to the interval (0, 1). We could include additional terms
depending on the specific application, for instance, anisotropic invariants that are convex with respect to cofF, such
as I5v = tr(cofCV0 ), can be added to this framework.
   Turning the attention back to (5), each of the Ψ Ii and Ψ Ii ,I j needs to be convex non-decreasing. This is equivalent
to the derivatives dΨ Ii /d Ii being monotonic functions, with dΨ Ii /d Ii ≥ 0 in the domain of Ii . In the next section
we show how to leverage N-ODEs to generate monotonic derivative functions and thus polyconvex strain energies.

2.2. Neural ordinary differential equations

   We are interested in finding functions that create monotonic maps between inputs x and outputs y. N-ODEs are
a novel architecture of neural networks that generalizes some successful models, such as residual networks [33].
The key idea is to replace the number of discrete layers of classical neural networks by a continuous transformation
of the hidden state by a learnable function. In this sense, the concept of depth of the neural network is replaced by
time. This results in the construction of an ordinary differential equation system:
      ∂H(t)
             = f (H(t), t; θ)                                                                                       (6)
        ∂t
Here H(t) represents the hidden state of the neural network. The function f (·; θ ) is represented by a fully-connected
neural network with trainable parameters θ . The relationship between the input and the output for this model can
be obtained by integrating the system in an arbitrary interval of time:
                       ∫ 1
      H(1) = H(0) +        f (H(t), t; θ )dt                                                                        (7)
                           0
Here, we assign the input to the initial condition x = H(0) and the output to the final state y = H(1).
   We know from ordinary differential equation analysis that the solution trajectories never intersect each other in
the state space, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Intersection of trajectories would imply that for a given point in the state
space there is more than one value for the rate of change f (H(t)), which contravenes the definition of the ordinary
differential equation system. In one-dimensional case, this condition implies that for two different trajectories H1 (t)
and H2 (t):
       H2 (0) ≥ H1 (0) ⇐⇒ H2 (1) ≥ H1 (1)                                                                                     (8)
       H2 (0) < H1 (0) ⇐⇒ H2 (1) < H1 (1)                                                                                     (9)
These conditions can be succinctly written in terms of the input x = H(0) and output y = H(1) of the neural
ordinary differential equations as:
       (y2 − y1 )(x2 − x1 ) ≥ 0                                                                                              (10)
which correspond exactly to the requirements for a monotonic function. To satisfy the polyconvexity requirements,
we also need to ensure that these functions are non-negative in the domain of the input. To achieve this property,
we need to ensure that
     ∫ 1
         f (H(t))dt ≥ max{0, −Hmin }, H(0) = Hmin                                                            (11)
        0
                                                                   4
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

where Hmin is lowest possible value of the input. Although there are multiple ways to satisfy this condition, here
we focus on the simplest case, where Hmin = 0 and f (0) = 0. This particular scenario can be achieved by shifting
the inputs and removing all the bias parameters from the neural network that approximates f and setting the initial
condition of the ODE as H (0) = 0. In this case, the neural network that approximates the right-hand side of the
ordinary differential equation can be written as:
       f (x) = Wn h(...W2 h(W1 x))                                                                                        (12)
where h(·) is a non-linear activation function applied element-wise, n is the depth of the network and Wi are the
learnable parameters. With this setup, we have shown that the functions approximated by one-dimensional N-ODEs
are monotonic and non-negative, and suitable to construct polyconvex strain energy functions.

Anisotropic, hyperelastic, and fully incompressible materials

   To demonstrate the potential of the proposed framework, we will attempt to learn an anisotropic, hyperelastic and
incompressible materials. We have introduced the strain energy, Ψ , which is a function of the right Cauchy–Green
deformation tensor, C, and two material direction vectors, v0 and w0 . For incompressible materials, the last term
of the strain energy, Ψ J , is replaced by the constraint p(J − 1) with p a Lagrange multiplier. Furthermore, in the
case of hyperelastic materials the free energy has no other contribution. The second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor,
S, follows from the Doyle–Erickson formula by differentiating the strain energy Ψ with respect to C [34],
             ∂Ψ       ∂Ψ         ∂Ψ                  ∂Ψ            ∂Ψ
       S=2       =2        I+2        (I1 I − C) + 2       V0 + 2       W0 + pC−1 .                             (13)
             ∂C       ∂ I1       ∂ I2                ∂ I4v        ∂ I4w
   Often times in finite element packages, the Cauchy stress, σ , is used, which can be obtained via a push forward
operation. To solve the equilibrium equations we also need the elasticity tensor:
             ∂S
       C=2       .                                                                                                 (14)
             ∂C
   The full expansion of the elasticity tensor is shown in the Supplement. Also note that if the finite element
implementation is done in the deformed configuration, the spatial version of the elasticity tensor, c, can be obtained
via a push forward operation.
   Therefore, given N-ODEs describing the strain energy derivatives, these functions can be used directly to
determine the stress for a given deformation by evaluating (13). For nonlinear finite element simulations, evaluation
of the tangent (14) requires the second derivatives of the strain energy, which in our case involves taking derivatives
of the N-ODEs with respect to their inputs.

Data-driven polyconvex constitutive models using neural ordinary differential equations

   We have shown that N-ODEs produce monotonic functions. We therefore use this tool to build the derivatives of
the terms in Eq. (5), i.e. ∂Ψ I1 /∂ I1 , ∂Ψ I2 /∂ I2 , etc. as illustrated in Fig. 1. To guarantee that the partial derivatives
with respect to the invariants are consistent with a unique potential, we use N-ODEs to interpolate the derivatives
of the individual contributions to the energy listed in Eq. (5). For instance, for the terms in Eq. (5) that depend
on a single invariant, a N-ODE is used to capture dΨ Ii (Ii )/d Ii each. For terms that depend on pairs of invariants,
consider the change of variable Ji j = αi j I1 + (1 − αi j )I j , then, a N-ODE is used to capture the derivative function
dΨ Ii ,I j (Ji j )/d Ji j . By producing monotonic non-negative derivative functions, we guarantee that the underlying strain
energy terms are convex non-decreasing functions of the invariants (or linear combinations of them), which in turn
guarantees polyconvexity of the energy with respect to F. A total of 10 N-ODEs are used, each corresponding
to a derivative of the strain energy terms in Eq. (5). The partial derivatives ∂Ψ Ii /∂ Ii are assembled consistently
from the derivatives dΨ Ii (Ii )/d Ii and dΨ Ii ,I j (Ji j )/d Ji j . An extended discussion of how the predicted derivatives
are consistent with an underlying potential is presented in the Supplemental material. The architecture of each of
the N-ODEs is the same and summarized in Table 1.
   While the monotonicity condition is guaranteed directly by using N-ODEs, to satisfy the non-negative conditions,
∂Ψ Ii /∂ Ii ≥ 0, we first note that I1 , I2 ≥ 3 for an incompressible material [31]. For these invariants, setting shifted
invariants J1 = I1 − 3, J2 = I2 − 3 as inputs to the N-ODE and setting biases to zero gives the initial condition
                                                              5
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

                           Table 1
                           Neural network architecture.
                            Layer                         Number of nodes                Activation function
                            Input                         1                              None
                            Hidden layer 1                5                              tanh
                            Hidden layer 2                5                              tanh
                            Output                        1                              Linear



H (0) = 0. A single non-negative bias is added after the evaluation of each of these two N-ODEs, i.e. H1 , H2 for
∂Ψ I1 /∂ I1 , ∂Ψ I2 /∂ I2 , resulting in ∂Ψ I1 /∂ I1 , ∂Ψ I2 /∂ I2 ≥ 0 at J1 = 0, J2 = 0. In this way, the functions Ψ I1 , Ψ I2
are convex non-decreasing with a minimum of H1 , H2 at I1 = 3, I2 = 3, which allows us to capture polyconvex
models such as Mooney–Rivlin and neo-Hookean. We remark that this formulation can be extended to compressible
materials using modified version of I1 , I2 . Namely, the usual split of the deformation gradient into isochoric and
volumetric parts results in the isochoric invariant I¯1 ≥ 3, such that I¯1 is polyconvex with respect to F [31]. The
isochoric invariant I¯2 is not polyconvex with respect to F. However, dividing by an appropriate power of J , one
can obtain modified invariants Iˆ2 ≥ 3 which are polyconvex [31].
   For the anisotropic terms, the domain of the input is I4v , I4w ≥ 0, with I4v = I4w = 1 for the identity map.
We set shifted invariants J4v = I4v − 1, J4w = I4w − 1 as the inputs of the N-ODEs and remove all biases to get
∂Ψ I4v /∂ I4v , ∂Ψ I4w /∂ I4w ≥ 0, and ∂Ψ I4v /∂ I4v , ∂Ψ I4w /∂ I4w = 0 for I4v , I4w = 1. For the mixed terms in eq (5) we
also set all biases to zero, but, additionally, we check if the output of the N-ODE is non-negative otherwise it is set
to zero.
   The N-ODE framework outlined here is general, it will always produce monotonic derivative functions and thus
convex functions of the invariants. Specifying the minimum of the energy and the stress-free state can be achieved
in variety of ways and we show one convenient solution. Note also that it is possible to incorporate anisotropic
compression terms by considering the invariants I5v = cof C : v0 ⊗ v0 and I5w = cof C : w0 ⊗ w0 , which are
convex with respect to cofF and represent area changes orthogonal to the fibers [22,32]. Extension to compressible
materials is also straightforward. Lastly, even though we focus on hyperelasticity, polyconvex strain energies can
be used as building blocks to describe dissipative mechanisms.

Model calibration and verification
   The training and validation data for the N-ODEs are taken from biaxial tests on porcine skin. The data
corresponds to five experimental protocols described in Table 2. In this case, the experiments are described in
terms of the principal stretches of the deformation gradient:
             λx x
           ⎡                ⎤
                    0     0
      F = ⎣ 0 λ yy 0 ⎦                                                                                     (15)
              0     0 λzz
With the assumption of plane stress incompressible behavior, J = λx x λ yy λzz = 1 leads to λzz = 1/λx x λ yy plus a
boundary condition to evaluate the pressure Lagrange multiplier p.
   We also test the N-ODE against synthetic data generated using four popular analytical models summarized in
the next subsection.
   Training is performed with the ADAM optimization algorithm (with a step size of 1.e−4, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999,
ϵ = 1.e−8) in 100 000 epochs with a batch size of 100. Training is performed with JAX high-performance
computing library for Python [35].

Holzapfel–Gasser–Ogden (HGO)
   The HGO material model proposed in [19] assumes there are two families of fibers that contribute to the energy
through an exponential term. The strain energy is,
       Ψ (C, v0 , w0 ) = Ψiso (C) + Ψaniso (C, v0 , w0 ) + p(J − 1),                                                            (16)
with dependence on two anisotropy directions v0 , w0 ,
                              k1 ∑ {
      Ψaniso (C, v0 , w0 ) =             exp k2 (Ii − 1)2 − 1 .
                                            [            ]   }
                                                                                                                                (17)
                             2k2 i=4v,4w
                                                                     6
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

                           Table 2
                           Biaxial experimental protocols. λx and λ y represent the stretches imposed in the
                           x and y directions and σz is the stress in the z direction. The parameter λ
                           is monotonically increased during the experiments to stretch the tissue. The last
                           component of the deformation gradient is directly obtained from the incompressible
                           constraint, while the vanishing normal stress is imposed as the necessary boundary
                           condition to solve for the pressure p.
                            Loading                       λx x                   λ yy                   σzz
                                                          √
                            Off-x                           λ                    λ
                                                                                 √                      0
                            Off-y                         λ                        λ                    0
                            Equibiaxial                   λ                      λ                      0
                            Strip-x                       λ                      1                      0
                            Strip-y                       1                      λ                      0



The parameters controlling the anisotropic contribution are k1 , k2 . The strain invariants I4v , I4w are the same as
defined in Eq. (4). The isotropic contribution depends on the first invariant, I1 , and is that of a neo-Hookean solid
       Ψiso (C) = µ(I1 − 3) ,                                                                                                (18)
with parameter µ. The incompressibility constraint is imposed through the Lagrange multiplier p.

Gasser–Ogden–Holzapfel (GOH)
   The GOH material model was initially proposed to model arterial walls [18]. It is an extension to the HGO
model which considers a single fiber family but incorporates fiber dispersion. Since then, it has been used to model
other soft tissues including skin. The strain energy density function in this model
       Ψ (C, v0 ) = Ψiso (C) + Ψaniso (C, v0 ) + p(J − 1) ,                                                                  (19)
where
       Ψiso (C) = µ(I1 − 3) ,                                                                                                (20)
                          k1 [
                               ex p k2 E 2 − 1 ,
                                   (      )   ]
       Ψaniso (C, v0 ) =                                                                                                     (21)
                         4k2
and
        E = [κ I1 + (1 − 3κ)I4v − 1] .                                                                                       (22)
   The parameters are the same as those used in the HGO model, except for the fiber dispersion parameter κ. The
strain invariants, I1 and I4v are the same as defined in (4), with the single anisotropy direction v0 .

Generalized Mooney Rivlin (MR)
   Originally, the MR models were proposed to capture the mechanical response of rubber-like materials in large
strains [36,37]. There are a number of different formulations for MR models, here we use
       Ψ (λ) = C10 (I1 − 3) + C01 (I2 − 3) + C20 (I1 − 3)2 + p(J − 1),                                                       (23)
   parameterized by C10 , C01 , C20 .

Fung-type models
    The strain energy function proposed by Fung et al. was one of the first models of soft tissue to capture the strain-
stiffening anisotropy of collagenous tissue [20]. Unlike the previous material models, the strain energy proposed by
Fung et al. is directly in terms of the Green–Lagrange strain, E = (C − I)/2,
                c1
       Ψ (C) =     exp(a1 E x2x + a2 E yy
                                       2
                                          + 2a4 E x x E yy ) (2D Fung)                                              (24)
                 2
with parameters a1 , a2 , a4 , c1 . Note that Eq. (24) is a model of a two-dimensional material. However, since its
original development, many generalizations of the model have been developed that extend its functionality to the
                                                                   7
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                          Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 2. Input space of the N-ODE in (a) λx x − λ yy space, I1 − I2 space, and (c) I1 − I2 − I4v space. Points in the input space where testing is
not feasible are shown with grey markers, whereas feasible points are in shades of blue. The points are sampled from a uniform distribution
within λx x , λ yy ∈ [0.7, 1.5]. The boundary of the feasible region is marked by the uniaxial tests in x and y directions in λx x − λ yy space
in (a). The map to the space of invariants is nonlinear and condenses the points into a narrow cone in the I1 − I2 space in (b). Including
anisotropy, the input domain for the data-driven models continues to show how evenly space points in the λx x − λ yy space are nonlinearly
mapped to the domain of the N-ODEs. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)



third dimension. One such generalization is due to [38,39]
               c1
      Ψ (C) =       exp(a1 E x2x + a2 E yy
                                         2         2
                                            + a3 E zz  + 2a4 E x x E yy + 2a5 E yy E zz
                2
         +2a6 E x x E zz + a7 E x2y + a8 E yz
                                           2
                                              + a9 E x2z ) (3D Fung)                                                                       (25)
with parameters c1 and a1 − a9 . In this text we use the 2D formulation for demonstration of convexity in Fig. 5
and 3D formulation for all other comparisons.

Finite element implementation
    A major motivation for the data-driven framework described here is to make it readily usable in large scale
finite element simulations and realistic applications. Since the N-ODEs directly encode energy derivatives, it is
straightforward to implement the N-ODE material model through the UANISOHYPER subroutine in the commercial
finite element package Abaqus. The implementation is available in the Github link at the end.

3. Results
   The model should estimate the stresses for arbitrary deformations of the material. In experimental mechanics of
thin specimens such as skin, the most appropriate method to quantify material behavior is through biaxial tests in
terms of the principal stretches, λx x , λ yy . However, as outlined above, the model inputs are the invariants of the
right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor, Ii . In Fig. 2a we show how the input space for biaxial experiments maps
into the input space of the N-ODEs, Fig. 2b,c. The protocols in Table 2 are shown as curves in 2a, the scatter
points in shades of blue denote deformations in the feasible region of λx x − λ yy space, and the scatter points in
gray denote infeasible regions. Points colored gray are not achievable during the testing of thin specimens like skin
because they correspond to a compressive state under which thin membranes would buckle. The boundary between
the feasible and infeasible regions are uniaxial tests in the x and y directions.
   The same points from Fig. 2a are mapped into the invariant space. A projection onto the space I1 − I2 is depicted
in Fig. 2b, and a projection onto I1 − I2 − I4v is shown in Fig. 2c. The space I1 , I2 corresponds to the input space
for the isotropic material behavior. The equibiaxial loading protocol falls in the middle of the feasible region in
the λx x − λ yy space, but it is at the boundary of the I1 − I2 space. The uniaxial loading cases, which determine
the boundary of the feasible region in λx x − λ yy space also continue to bound the feasible domain in the I1 − I2
space. Even though the testing points in Fig. 2a are evenly distributed in λx x − λ yy space, they form a narrow cone
in the I1 − I2 space. The map is highly nonlinear. Since the material model is a function of the invariants, the
performance of data-driven models depends on sampling the invariant space, which is not necessarily achieved by
simply covering evenly spaced points in λx x − λ yy space.
                                                                       8
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                          Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 3. An illustration of how the N-ODE maps points in the input space to partial derivatives of the strain energy. Time evolution of (a)
J1 to ∂Ψ /∂ I1 , (b) J2 to ∂Ψ /∂ I2 , (c) J4v to ∂Ψ /∂ I4v and (d) J4w to ∂Ψ /∂ I4w , and, (e) the shape of the resulting functions ∂Ψ /∂ Ii . The
notation Ji is used to denote shifted invariants as inputs to the N-ODE in order to satisfy the initial condition H (0) = 0, which is one
solution to achieve non-negative derivatives with a vanishing stress at the identity map.



    In Fig. 3 we illustrate the principle behind the N-ODE map. Points from the input space (translated invariants
Ji , i.e. J1 = I1 − 3) are integrated in time based on the neural network, which encodes the right-hand side of an
ODE. The partial derivatives of the strain energy function are defined as the solution of a N-ODE at the fictitious
time t = 1. Only the mappings for the invariants J1 , J2 , J4v and J4w are shown in Fig. 3a–d. The monotonicity
of the transformation is evident in these figures, it follows from the fact that curves originating at different initial
condition never intersect as they are integrated in time. Fig. 3e represents the direct relationship between input and
output without the pseudo-time axis.

Comparisons against synthetic data

    We start by training the N-ODE material model with synthetic stress–stretch data generated from the four closed-
form analytical models introduced in Section 2.2. We plot the training data as well as the predictions of the N-ODE
for each of the four cases in Fig. 4. Even though the analytical models have each a completely different functional
form, the same N-ODE architecture is capable of replicating the different synthetic datasets with high accuracy.
The average absolute error is small in all cases. The highest error occurs for the 3D Fung model, this is partly
due to the fact that the Fung model is not guaranteed to be polyconvex, which makes it impossible for the NODE
to capture its response in regions where convexity is not satisfied. An example later on clarifies this further. The
best fit of the N-ODE is for the Mooney–Rivlin material. Among the four synthetic datasets, the Mooney–Rivlin
is the least nonlinear. The other three analytical models include an exponential term that describes a rapid strain
stiffening typical of soft tissues. Concomitantly, the exponential term in these models poses challenges for model
calibration due to the extreme sensitivity to parameters [26]. We also note that training takes on the order of 6 min
on an Apple M1 CPU for each of the synthetic data sets.
                                                                        9
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                    Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 4. Synthetic training data and N-ODE predictions using (a) GOH, (b) Mooney Rivlin, (c) HGO and (d) 3D Fung type material models.
The N-ODE is able to interpolate synthetic data from closed-form constitutive equations.



   Next, we demonstrate how the N-ODE automatically satisfies polyconvexity of the strain energy. We train the
N-ODE material model with synthetic data from GOH and Fung models. We show in Figs. 5a, c the predicted
contours of strain energy of the two analytical models and the corresponding N-ODE approximations are in Figs. 5b,
d. GOH is an inherently convex model [18], which is reflected in the contour of the energy as a function of the
Green Lagrange strain components for parameters µ = 0.0102, k1 = 0.513, k2 = 59.1, κ = 0.271, θ = 1.57.
(Fig. 5a). Naturally, the N-ODE trained with this model also predicts a convex function (Fig. 5b). The Fung
model, on the other hand, is known to exhibit non-convex behavior for some choice of parameters, for instance
c1 = 0.00241, a1 = −1.75, a2 = −21.5, a4 = 49.8. The N-ODE model cannot interpolate these data, it can only
find a convex approximation as seen in Fig. 5d.

Performance on experimental data

   The primary objective of developing N-ODE material models is being able to capture experimental data without
the restrictions of closed-form energy functions. The experimental data for this example consists of data from five
biaxial tests as described in Table 2, performed on porcine skin specimens. We divide the data in two sets, train
the data on three of the biaxial test data and validate against the remaining biaxial test data as shown in Fig. 6.
   The N-ODE reproduces the training data almost identically, with an average error of 0.012 MPa in the worst case
scenario. The error in the validation tests is naturally higher than in the training set, but it is still in a reasonable
range with average errors 0.088 MPa for off-x and 0.019 MPa for off-y data.
   In Fig. 7, we train both the N-ODE and the four analytical models with data from a different porcine skin
specimen subjected to same loading as described in Table 2. Similarly to before, we split the data into training
and validation sets. The maximum principal stress predictions, σmp , from each of the analytical models as well as
the N-ODE model are plotted as the graph of a surface over the λx x , λ yy plane (Fig. 7a–e). The experimental data
are plotted as curves colored based on the absolute error between these curves and the predicted response surface.
Fig. 7f shows a box plot of the error distribution for each model. None of the analytical models are capable of
capturing the behavior of the material in the training set, whereas the N-ODE replicates the behavior in that region
flawlessly. Errors naturally increase overall in the validation set. Yet, even in the validation set, the N-ODE has the
                                                                 10
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 5. Strain energy contours for synthetic data generated using (a) GOH and (c) 2D Fung type material models and (b), (d) the predictions
of the N-ODE after training on these datasets, respectively. The training region corresponded to tensile biaxial deformations, as indicated,
while the shaded region was not included during learning. When fed non-convex data, the N-ODE still produces a polyconvex output because
it is built in the formulation.



lowest median errors. Note also that under high equibiaxial stretches, the stresses in GOH, HGO and Fung models
increase to unreasonably high values. This is due to the exponential form of these analytical models. The N-ODE,
on the other hand, maintains convexity but does not infer an exponential growth beyond the training region.
    Table 3 summarizes the performances of the five models from another series of tests. In each row of Table 3 we
train the models on the first 80% of the loading path and test against the remaining 20%. The average error from
the validation test is shown in the Table. In other words, these tests are done to measure the ability of each of the
models to extrapolate away from the training region, toward larger deformations. The last row in Table 3 contains
the average of the errors among the five individual tests. The N-ODE has the lowest error in three of the five cases
and has the lowest average error over the five tests, at 0.048 MPa. The second best performing model, GOH, has
                                                                    11
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

                            Table 3
                            Mean absolute error, in MPa, for the validation set for the 4 analytical models and
                            the N-ODE. Training/fitting is performed with the first 80% of data points of each
                            loading protocol while the last 20% are held for validation.
                             Protocol           GOH          MR           HGO           3D Fung         N-ODE
                             Off-x              0.083        0.114        0.245         0.246           0.009
                             Off-y              0.010        0.024        0.071         0.123           0.062
                             Equibiaxial        0.037        0.100        0.141         0.035           0.031
                             Strip-x            0.056        0.123        0.051         0.133           0.098
                             Strip-y            0.120        0.095        0.051         0.194           0.038
                             Average            0.062        0.091        0.112         0.146           0.048




Fig. 6. Predictions of the N-ODE material model after training on porcine data. Test results from (a) equibiaxial, (b) Strip-x and (c) Strip-y
testing protocols were used for training while (d) Off-x and (e) Off-y test results were reserved for validation.



32% higher error relative to the N-ODE model. The Supplemental material shows one additional example in which
we compare a much simpler N-ODE against the GOH model.

Finite element simulations

  The results from finite element simulations in Abaqus for a range of geometries and loading scenarios using the
N-ODE material model are showcased here.
                                                                     12
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 7. Surfaces of maximum principal stress (σ M P ) and curves with the experimental data colored based on error for (a) GOH, (b) Mooney
Rivlin, (c) HGO, (d) Fung and (e) N-ODE. Box plots of error distribution for the five models (f). (For interpretation of the references to
color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)


                                                                   13
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 8. Finite element simulations using the N-ODE material model. Boundary conditions on the undeformed geometry are shown in the
first column, deformed geometry in the second column, and contours of σx x and σ yy on the deformed geometry are depicted in the last two
columns for (a) uniaxial tension, (b) shearing and stretching, (c) torsional loading scenarios. The material is anisotropic, with the directions
of anisotropy depicted as quiver plots in the reference geometries. The red vector field corresponds to the stiffer orientation v0 , while the
black vector field corresponds to w0 . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)



   First, three basic loading scenarios were applied to a 5 × 5 cm specimen as shown in Fig. 8 For a simple uniaxial
tension test in the x direction, unconstrained in y the resulting stresses match the analytical evaluation (see Fig. 6,
indicating that the subroutine is functioning as desired (Fig. 8a).
   In Fig. 8b the left side of the specimen is held fixed while the right side is displaced both in x and y directions,
whereas in 8c a torsional loading is applied. For the shearing deformation we see a band of stress for the σx x
component, and concentration of the σ yy component at the corners but otherwise fairly uniform and small σ yy stresses
since the upper and bottom surfaces are unconstrained. When a torque is applied in Fig. 8c, stress concentrations
develop in the corners where there is the most deformations as expected from the clamping condition on the
boundary. In all cases the simulations converged quadratically, demonstrating that the N-ODE model can be used
as a constitutive equation in stable, nonlinear finite element simulations. Solution of the three models in Fig. 8 take
roughly 31 s, 49 s and 2 min 35 s, respectively. The same problems take 14 s, 17 s and 1 min 2 s when the GOH
material model is used instead.
   Next, we performed tissue expansion simulations on 10 × 10 × 0.3 cm3 a patch of skin (Fig. 9a). A rectangular
expander of dimensions 8 × 8 cm2 underneath the skin is modeled by the fluid cavity feature in Abaqus. The
expander is inflated to 20, 30 and 40 cm3 resulting in the strain contours shown in Fig. 8b and c.
   Lastly, a surgical operation was simulated on the scalp of a cancer patient with a patient specific geometry
reported in [40]. Figs. 10a–e show the model during various stages of surgery. Fig. 10a shows the initial geometry
                                                                      14
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248




Fig. 9. Finite element simulations of tissue expansion using the N-ODE material model in UANISOHYPER. Model setup (a), and contours
of strain (b and c) on the deformed geometry after the expander is inflated to 20, 40 and 60 cm3 , respectively.




Fig. 10. Virtual surgery finite element model performed in Abaqus using the N-ODE material model through the user defined UANISOHYPER
subroutine. Initial geometry of the scalp (a), contours of maximum principal stress on the deformed geometry after the lower sutures are
completed (b), and as the upper sutures are stretched to close the wound by 30%, 60% and 100% (c–e), respectively. Photographs of the
scalp of the patient before the surgery (f) and after the surgery superimposed with contours of maximum principal stress (g).



of the model, Fig. 10b–e show contours of maximum principal stress on the deformed geometry when the sutures
near the ear are completed, and when the sutures on top of the cranium are brought together. Fig. 10f shows a photo
of the patient’s scalp prior to surgery and Fig. 10g a post-operative photo of the same region with the predicted
contours of maximum principal stress superimposed.

4. Discussion
   In this paper we present the first automatically polyconvex data-driven framework for constitutive modeling of
nonlinear anisotropic materials. Most proposed methods either do not impose convexity or rely on additional loss
terms to penalize deviation from convexity during model training [12,41].
   Our approach is general enough to approximate a large class of material models. Although there might be
polyconvex strain energy functions that are not captured by our solution, they might not be needed in practice.
                                                                  15
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole               Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

In general, our approach can represent any degree of non-linearity for a given invariant and reproduce certain types
of interactions between invariants. We could arbitrarily increase the complexity of the model by adding second order
interactions (i.e. Ii + I j + Ik ) and by composing the resulting strain energy function with other convex non-decreasing
functions. If we do this multiple times, we could create deep networks to approximate an even larger class of strain
energy functions. However, from what we have seen in our experiments, the capacity of the functions presented in
this work is enough to model the behavior of highly nonlinear and anisotropic materials, e.g. soft tissues.
   The proposed framework is based on the principal invariants of the right Cauchy Green deformation tensor,
which is commonplace in the development of anisotropic polyconvex strain energies [21]. However, it could be
reformulated for a different set of basic invariants such as the principal stretches [42], or the invariants of the right
stretch tensor [43,44]. Specifically for anisotropy, we have restricted our attention to the pseudo-invariants I4v and
I4w , which are polyconvex functions of the deformation that measure the square of the stretch along the directions
v0 and w0 . Other anisotropic pseudo-invariants are possible. For example, as discussed in the Methods section,
I5v = cofC : v0 ⊗ v0 and I5w = cofC : w0 ⊗ w0 are also polyconvex functions that can be used to capture energy
associated with compression of the anisotropy directions [31]. We did not consider terms such as I5v , I5w because
our data consisted of biaxial tests and because it is common to assume that fibers in soft tissues do not contribute
to the energy under compression [19]. Incorporating additional directions of anisotropy, for instance based on some
fiber probability distribution [45,46], would be straightforward. The results with only two directions were already
satisfactory and we did not include additional anisotropic pseudo-invariants for that reason.
   Alternative conditions of convexity have been considered in the literature. Among them, convexity of the strain
energy with respect to C is often sought in constitutive models [41,47]. However, the conditions under which
convexity with respect to C guarantees global minimizers to boundary value problems in nonlinear elasticity is not
fully elucidated, see for example the recent work by Gao et al. [48]. As pointed out in [49] and [50], convexity
with respect to C and polyconvexity with respect to F are not equivalent. Thus, in this work we focused on the
condition of polyconvexity established by Ball [16].
   Although the proposed approach works excellently for the cases we tested, we acknowledge that there are
alternatives to arrive at similar results. For example, any invertible neural network architecture should work because
a function that possess an inverse in one-dimensions is monotonic. N-ODEs are an elegant and efficient solution
to this problem, because the gradient can be computed with a system of ODEs rather than back-propagation,
which can be expensive for a deep neural network. We also note that there are other architectures to guarantee
convexity of functions based on similar principles [51]. We think our method has two main advantages: first, one
can directly incorporate domain knowledge by selecting the terms and interactions that are relevant rather than
using all possible inputs (strain invariants and combinations). This approach also adds interpretability, as each of
the fitted functions can be inspected and compared to existing models. Second, by approximating derivatives of the
strain energy function rather than the strain energy function itself, we decrease the degree of differentiability of
the neural network and can employ simpler activation functions, such as ReLU. Alternative methods to deal with
the issues of differentiability are integrable neural networks or regularization terms during model training [41,52].
Even though we do not have direct access to the strain energy function, the fact that the derivative functions are all
one-dimensional enables the use of standard quadrature rules to efficiently integrate the strain energy if needed.
   Lastly, we remark that in this paper we have focused on incompressible, and hyperelastic behavior. This is not a
limitation of the framework but simply the application explored in detail here. The framework produces polyconvex
strain energies applicable to a much wider set of problems. For example, consideration of compressible behavior
would require a suitable volumetric strain energy function which can also be data-driven and convex. An example of
a compressible material is given in the Supplement. Modeling of viscoelastic materials or elastoplastic deformations
can also be formulated using data-driven polyconvex strain energies [53–55].

Conclusions
   We present a data-driven framework to construct automatically polyconvex strain energy functions. The
formulation is based on N-ODEs. We showcase the framework by using it to model the nonlinear, anisotropic,
hyperelastic, and incompressible behavior of skin. The data-driven framework outperforms closed-form constitutive
models. Our results foment the appeal of data-driven methods to better capture experimental material response
without the constraints of analytical expressions for the strain energy while still satisfying the basic requirements
of physically realistic models, i.e. the notion of polyconvexity. Additionally, the formulation is invariant and allows
                                                           16
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

for the efficient computation of the second derivatives of the strain energy, which further enables the use of our
data-driven framework in finite element simulations. We therefore anticipate that this work will further cement the
use of data-driven methods in computational mechanics.

Declaration of competing interest
   The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment
  This work was supported by the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases of the
National Institute of Health under award R01AR074525.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
  Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2022.115248.
Code associated with this publication is available at a Github repository https://github.com/tajtac/NODE v2.

References
 [1] J. Ma, F. Wu, J. Zhu, D. Xu, D. Kong, A pre-trained convolutional neural network based method for thyroid nodule diagnosis,
     Ultrasonics 73 (2017) 221–230.
 [2] P. Guhathakurta, Long-range monsoon rainfall prediction of 2005 for the districts and sub-division Kerala with artificial neural network,
     Current Sci. 90 (6) (2006) 773–779.
 [3] A.D. Casey, S.F. Son, I. Bilionis, B.C. Barnes, Prediction of energetic material properties from electronic structure using 3D
     convolutional neural networks, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 60 (10) (2020) 4457–4473.
 [4] K. Duraisamy, G. Iaccarino, H. Xiao, Turbulence modeling in the age of data, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 51 (1) (2019) 357–377.
 [5] J. Lee, D. Almond, B. Harris, The use of neural networks for the prediction of fatigue lives of composite materials, Composites A
     30 (10) (1999) 1159–1169.
 [6] L. Lu, M. Dao, P. Kumar, U. Ramamurty, G.E. Karniadakis, S. Suresh, Extraction of mechanical properties of materials through deep
     learning from instrumented indentation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117 (3) (2020) 7052–7062.
 [7] Z. Wang, X. Huan, K. Garikipati, Variational system identification of the partial differential equations governing microstructure evolution
     in materials: Inference over sparse and spatially unrelated data, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 377 (2021) 113706.
 [8] B.A. Le, J. Yvonnet, Q.-C. He, Computational homogenization of nonlinear elastic materials using neural networks, Internat. J. Numer.
     Methods Engrg. 104 (12) (2015) 1061–1084.
 [9] M. Liu, L. Liang, W. Sun, A generic physics-informed neural network-based constitutive model for soft biological tissues, Comput.
     Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 372 (2020).
[10] G.C. Peng, M. Alber, A.B. Tepole, W.R. Cannon, S. De, S. Dura-Bernal, K. Garikipati, G. Karniadakis, W.W. Lytton, P. Perdikaris,
     et al., Multiscale modeling meets machine learning: What can we learn? Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. (2020) 1–21.
[11] X. Zhang, K. Garikipati, Machine learning materials physics: Multi-resolution neural networks learn the free energy and nonlinear
     elastic response of evolving microstructures, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 372 (2020) 113362.
[12] V. Tac, V.D. Sree, M.K. Rausch, A.B. Tepole, Data-driven modeling of the mechanical behavior of anisotropic soft biological tissue,
     2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05388.
[13] J.E. Marsden, T.J. Hughes, Mathematical Foundations of Elasticity, Courier Corporation, 1994.
[14] E. Kuhl, H. Askes, P. Steinmann, An illustration of the equivalence of the loss of ellipticity conditions in spatial and material settings
     of hyperelasticity, Eur. J. Mech. A Solids 25 (2) (2006) 199–214.
[15] C.B. Morrey Jr., Quasi-convexity and the lower semicontinuity of multiple integrals., Pacific J. Math. 2 (1) (1952) 25–53.
[16] J.M. Ball, Convexity conditions and existence theorems in nonlinear elasticity, Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 63 (4) (1976) 337–403.
[17] F. Rindler, Calculus of Variations, Vol. 5, Springer, 2018.
[18] T.C. Gasser, R.W. Ogden, G.A. Holzapfel, Hyperelastic modelling of arterial layers with distributed collagen fibre orientations, J. R.
     Soc. Interface 3 (6) (2005) 15–35.
[19] G.A. Holzapfel, T.C. Gasser, R.W. Ogden, A new constitutive framework for arterial wall mechanics and a comparative study of
     material models, J. Elasticity 61 (2000) 1–48.
[20] Y.C. Fung, F. Fronek, P. Patitucci, Pseudoelasticity of arteries and the choice of its mathematical expression, Am. J. Physiol. 237 (5)
     (1979) H620–H631.
[21] G. Chagnon, M. Rebouah, D. Favier, Hyperelastic energy densities for soft biological tissues: a review, J. Elasticity 120 (2) (2015)
     129–160.
[22] A.E. Ehret, M. Itskov, A polyconvex hyperelastic model for fiber-reinforced materials in application to soft tissues, J. Mater. Sci. 42
     (21) (2007) 8853–8863.
[23] G. Limbert, Skin Biophysics: From Experimental Characterisation to Advanced Modelling, Vol. 22, Springer, 2019.
                                                                      17
V. Tac, F.S. Costabal and A.B. Tepole                         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 398 (2022) 115248

[24] J.W. Jor, M.D. Parker, A.J. Taberner, M.P. Nash, P.M. Nielsen, Computational and experimental characterization of skin mechanics:
     identifying current challenges and future directions, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. 5 (5) (2013) 539–556.
[25] B. Mueller, J. Elrod, O. Distler, C. Schiestl, E. Mazza, On the reliability of suction measurements for skin characterization, J. Biomech.
     Eng. 143 (2) (2021) 021002.
[26] T. Lee, S.Y. Turin, A.K. Gosain, I. Bilionis, A.B. Tepole, Propagation of material behavior uncertainty in a nonlinear finite element
     model of reconstructive surgery, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 17 (2018) 1857–1873.
[27] Y. Leng, V. Tac, S. Calve, A.B. Tepole, Predicting the mechanical properties of biopolymer gels using neural networks trained on
     discrete fiber network data, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 387 (2021).
[28] N.N. Vlassis, W. Sun, Sobolev training of thermodynamic-informed neural networks for interpretable elasto-plasticity models with level
     set hardening, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 377 (2021).
[29] R.T.Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, D. Duvenaud, Neural ordinary differential equations, 2019.
[30] J. Schröder, Anisotropic polyconvex energies, in: Poly-, Quasi-and Rank-One Convexity in Applied Mechanics, Springer, 2010, pp.
     53–105.
[31] J. Schröder, P. Neff, Invariant formulation of hyperelastic transverse isotropy based on polyconvex free energy functions, Int. J. Solids
     Struct. 40 (2) (2003) 401–445.
[32] D. Balzani, P. Neff, J. Schröder, G. Holzapfel, A polyconvex framework for soft biological tissues. Adjustment to experimental data,
     Int. J. Solids Struct. 43 (20) (2006) 6052–6070.
[33] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[34] T. Doyle, J. Ericksen, in: H. Dryden, T. von Kármán (Eds.), Nonlinear Elasticity, in: Advances in Applied Mechanics, vol. 4, Elsevier,
     1956, pp. 53–115.
[35] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M.J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne,
     Q. Zhang, JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
[36] M. Mooney, A theory of large elastic deformation, J. Appl. Phys. 11 (9) (1940).
[37] R.S. Rivlin, Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials iv. further developments of the general theory, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A
     241 (835) (1948).
[38] C.J. Chuong, Y.C. Fung, On residual stresses in arteries, J. Biomech. Eng. 108 (2) (1986) 189–192, _eprint: https://asmedigitalcollect
     ion.asme.org/biomechanical/article-pdf/108/2/189/5665801/189_1.pdf.
[39] S.X. Deng, J. Tomioka, J.C. Debes, Y.C. Fung, New experiments on shear modulus of elasticity of arteries, Am. J. Physiol. Heart
     Circ. Physiol. 266 (1) (1994) H1–H10, PMID: 8304490.
[40] T. Lee, S.Y. Turin, C. Stowers, A.K. Gosain, A.B. Tepole, Personalized computational models of tissue-rearrangement in the scalp
     predict the mechanical stress signature of rotation flaps, Cleft Palate-Craniofacial J. 58 (4) (2021) 438–445.
[41] N.N. Vlassis, R. Ma, W. Sun, Geometric deep learning for computational mechanics part I: anisotropic hyperelasticity, Comput. Methods
     Appl. Mech. Engrg. 371 (2020) 113299.
[42] M. Shariff, Physical invariants for nonlinear orthotropic solids, Int. J. Solids Struct. 48 (13) (2011) 1906–1914.
[43] D.J. Steigmann, On isotropic, frame-invariant, polyconvex strain-energy functions, Q. J. Mech. Appl. Math. 56 (4) (2003) 483–491.
[44] D.J. Steigmann, Frame-invariant polyconvex strain-energy functions for some anisotropic solids, Math. Mech. Solids 8 (5) (2003)
     497–506.
[45] Y. Lanir, A structural theory for the homogeneous biaxial stress-strain relationships in flat collagenous tissues, J. Biomech. 12 (6)
     (1979) 423–436.
[46] M.S. Sacks, Biaxial mechanical evaluation of planar biological materials, J. Elasticity Phys. Sci. Solids 61 (1) (2000) 199–246.
[47] G.A. Holzapfel, R.W. Ogden, Constitutive modelling of passive myocardium: a structurally based framework for material
     characterization, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 367 (1902) (2009) 3445–3475.
[48] D.Y. Gao, P. Neff, I. Roventa, C. Thiel, On the convexity of nonlinear elastic energies in the right Cauchy-Green tensor, J. Elasticity
     127 (2) (2017) 303–308.
[49] J. Sivaloganathan, S.J. Spector, On the uniqueness of energy minimizers in finite elasticity, J. Elasticity 133 (1) (2018) 73–103.
[50] J.P. Wilber, J.R. Walton, The convexity properties of a class of constitutive models for biological soft issues, Math. Mech. Solids 7
     (3) (2002) 217–235.
[51] B. Amos, L. Xu, J.Z. Kolter, Input convex neural networks, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2017, pp.
     146–155.
[52] G.H. Teichert, A. Natarajan, A. Van der Ven, K. Garikipati, Machine learning materials physics: Integrable deep neural networks enable
     scale bridging by learning free energy functions, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 353 (2019) 201–216.
[53] J. Bonet, A.J. Gil, R. Ortigosa, A computational framework for polyconvex large strain elasticity, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech.
     Engrg. 283 (2015) 1061–1094.
[54] J. Krishnan, D.J. Steigmann, A polyconvex formulation of isotropic elastoplasticity theory, IMA J. Appl. Math. 79 (5) (2014) 722–738.
[55] D. Nordsletten, A. Capilnasiu, W. Zhang, A. Wittgenstein, M. Hadjicharalambous, G. Sommer, R. Sinkus, G.A. Holzapfel, A viscoelastic
     model for human myocardium, 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.06671.




                                                                      18
