                                                         Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072



                                                           Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                               Journal of Computational Physics
                                                                  www.elsevier.com/locate/jcp




Learning constitutive relations using symmetric positive
deﬁnite neural networks
Kailai Xu a,1 , Daniel Z. Huang a,1 , Eric Darve a,b,∗
a
    Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, United States of America
b
    Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, United States of America



a r t i c l e             i n f o                         a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                          We present a new neural-network architecture, called the Cholesky-factored symmetric
Received 26 July 2020                                     positive deﬁnite neural network (SPD-NN), for modeling constitutive relations in compu-
Received in revised form 4 November 2020                  tational mechanics. Instead of directly predicting the stress of the material, the SPD-NN
Accepted 7 December 2020
                                                          trains a neural network to predict the Cholesky factor of the tangent stiffness matrix,
Available online 6 January 2021
                                                          based on which the stress is calculated in incremental form. As a result of this special
Keywords:                                                 structure, SPD-NN weakly imposes convexity on the strain energy function, satisﬁes the
Neural networks                                           second order work criterion (Hill’s criterion) and time consistency for path-dependent ma-
Plasticity                                                terials, and therefore improves numerical stability, especially when the SPD-NN is used
Hyperelasticity                                           in ﬁnite element simulations. Depending on the types of available data, we propose two
Finite element method                                     training methods, namely direct training for strain and stress pairs and indirect training
Multiscale homogenization                                 for loads and displacement pairs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of SPD-NN on hyper-
                                                          elastic, elasto-plastic, and multiscale ﬁber-reinforced plate problems from solid mechanics.
                                                          The generality and robustness of SPD-NN make it a promising tool for a wide range of
                                                          constitutive modeling applications.
                                                                                                                © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction

    One of the goals of material modeling is to construct constitutive models to describe the relationship between strain and
stress. The mapping between strain and stress (constitutive relations) can be high dimensional and history-dependent, and
these complexities make constitutive modeling very challenging. Traditionally, the constitutive relations are derived from
microscopic interactions between multiscale structures or between atoms. However, ﬁrst-principles simulations (e.g., molec-
ular dynamics based simulations), which can resolve these interactions, remain prohibitively expensive. The computational
diﬃculty motivates the construction of constitutive models with simpliﬁed assumptions that still capture the essential phys-
ical constraints of constitutive relations, such as isotropicity or thermodynamics principles of material. Parameters in the
models are then calibrated on limited and coarse-scale loading test data. These constitutive models lead to affordable and
robust simulations, and thus the models are very important for large-scale engineering and scientiﬁc applications. However,
the functional forms representing these constitutive models are often limited to global exponents and polynomials, which
are insuﬃcient to represent complicated multiscale constitutive relations.



    * Corresponding author.
        E-mail addresses: kailaix@stanford.edu (K. Xu), zhengyuh@stanford.edu (D.Z. Huang), darve@stanford.edu (E. Darve).
    1
        Both authors contributed equally to this work.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.110072
0021-9991/© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                         Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 1. Training neural-network-based constitutive relations NNθ , based on different types of data. When the strain and stress pairs are available, we
can train the neural network using the typical least-square regression. However, when only the displacement and external load (experimental) data are
available, we need to couple a neural-network-based constitutive model with the dynamic structural equation. In this work, we demonstrate training
neural-network-based constitutive relations with both approaches.


    Since the development of deep learning techniques, deep neural networks (DNN) have emerged as a promising technique
for constitutive modeling. For example, pioneering work has demonstrated the feasibility of constitutive modeling using
neural networks in a wide variety of applications, such as Ghaboussi et al. [1] for modeling concrete, Ellis et al. [2] for
modeling sands, Shen et al. [3], Liang et al. [4] for modeling hyper-elastic materials, and Furukawa et al. [5] for modeling
viscoelastic materials.
    Recently, recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which are effective for history-dependent phenomena, have been applied to
model multiscale multi-permeability poroplasticity [6], multiscale-plasticity [7], and multiscale one-dimensional bars [8].
    Additionally, neural networks have been used to address more complex material behaviors, such as microcracking, brittle
fracture, and crack propagation [9–12]. Neural networks that take as input microscopic structure parameters were used to
design of new materials [13–16].
    The cited literature shows that DNNs offer a powerful framework to represent complex constitutive relations. There are
two important aspects of neural-network-based constitutive relations:

  • Firstly, depending on the nature and availability of data, the neural-network-based constitutive relations can either
    be trained directly or indirectly (Fig. 1). Most of the cited literature adopt the direct training method, where neural-
    network-based constitutive models and dynamic structural equations are eventually decoupled: the neural networks,
    which accept strain (or strain increments, etc.) as input and yield stress as outputs, are trained using input-output
    pairs. To model complex material behavior, this method requires a voluminous amount of strain-stress data, which
    can be expensive or impossible to collect. Our proposed approach enables training the neural network with either
    direct input-output data or indirect full-ﬁeld data [17–20], such as displacement and external load data, by coupling
    the neural network with a dynamic structural equation solver (Fig. 1); the indirect training approach alleviates the
    demanding requirement for strain-stress data.
  • Secondly and more importantly, even DNNs that appear to make accurate predictions may be numerically unstable when
    we plug them into a dynamic structural equation time integrator. For example, in benchmarks that we run, accurate
    DNNs in fact led to unstable models when coupled with dynamic structural equations. For predictive modeling, issues
    like numerical stability, generalization, and global accuracy have not been suﬃciently explored. In the present work, the
    numerical stability of the coupled system is studied, and several stability-preserving neural network architectures are
    proposed.

    If one solves the structural governing equations embedded with general DNN constitutive models, numerical instabilities
are observed (see Section 4.1 for an example). We found that the numerical instability is actually due to the violation of
physical constraints in the constitutive models, such as the time consistency and the second order work criterion, which we
will discuss in the following. We show that by designing DNNs that satisfy these physical constraints, we can dramatically
improve numerical stability and prediction accuracy.
    The idea of adding physics-based constraints to the neural network is not new. For example, Ling et al. [21] enforce
isotropicity an orthotropy on the predicted strain-energy of the crystal elastic materials through building a basis of invariant
inputs. Liu et al. [22,23] design deep material networks using a composition of simple building blocks inspired from the
two-phase linearly elastic model. Heider et al. [24] introduced coordinate-free invariant metrics for the objective frame-
independent functions to model anisotropic elastoplastic materials. However, despite better accuracy for predicting the
stress as a result of satisfying these constraints, the performance of the resulting structural governing equations coupled
with these physics constrained neural networks is not necessarily improved. For example, a trained neural-network-based

                                                                          2
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


constitutive model may predict stress relatively accurately, but it may not yield a symmetric positive deﬁnite stiffness
matrix. Because of this, the numerical solver, where the neural network is embedded, may produce nonphysical solutions
or suffer from numerical instability.
   In the present work, we focus on the numerical stability aspect of the resulting hybrid model—the conservation equations
embedded with NN-based constitutive models. We propose a novel neural network architecture with customized output
layers to fulﬁll two objectives.

  • The ﬁrst objective is related to the convexity of the strain-energy, which plays a signiﬁcant role in the numerical
    stability. To this end, we propose to predict the tangent stiffness matrix and enforce that it be symmetric positive
    deﬁnite.2 The symmetric positive deﬁniteness guarantees the weak convexity of the strain-energy and fulﬁlls the second
    order work criterion (Hill’s criterion) for path-dependent materials.
  • Another objective is ensuring time consistency equation (13), in particular for path-dependent materials, such as elasto-
    plastic materials.

To achieve these objectives, instead of training a neural network to identify a nonlinear map directly between strain and
stress, we train a neural network (with weights and biases θ ) that maps the strain (and possibly other relevant quantities)
to a lower triangular matrix Lθ (a Cholesky factor). We then construct the constitutive model in the following incremental
form:

        σ = Lθ LθT                                                                                                                                     (1)

where  and σ are the incremental strain and stress in Voigt notation.3 In our formulation, the tangent stiffness matrix
Lθ LθT is automatically symmetric positive semideﬁnite. If we assume that Lθ is bounded, i.e., Lθ 2 ≤ C < ∞ for a constant
independent of θ , this incremental form leads to a time consistent scheme.
    In the present work, results based on neural networks trained on both direct input-output data and indirect full-ﬁeld
data [17–19] are presented. The robustness of our approach is demonstrated in different numerical applications, including
a hyperelastic material, an elasto-plastic material, and a multiscale material. We have developed a software library that
seamlessly combines traditional ﬁnite element methods and neural networks. The code is accessible online:

                                                        https://github.com/kailaix/NNFEM.jl

   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst introduce the background in Section 2, including the
governing equations, different classical constitutive relations and their associated constraints. In Section 3, we present our
constraint-embedded neural network architecture—SPD-NN, and the training procedures. Finally, we apply the learned NN-
based constitutive relations to several solid mechanics problems, including a one-dimensional truss coupon, and several two-
dimensional thin plate problems with hyperelastic material, elasto-plastic material and ﬁber-reinforced multiscale material.
Several issues related to neural networks are discussed in Section 5. We discuss a possible generalization of the approach in
Section 6.

2. Background

2.1. Governing equations

    The governing equation of a solid undergoing inﬁnitesimal deformations can be written as

        ρ ü = div σ + ρ b           in 
          u = ū                     on u                                                                                                                (2)
        σ n = t̄                     on t

where ρ is the mass density, u is the displacement vector, σ is the stress tensor, and ρ b is the body force vector;  denotes
the computational domain. The prescribed displacement ū and the surface traction t̄ are imposed on the domain boundaries
u and t with the outward unit normal n, where u ∩ t = ∅ and u ∪ t = ∂ .
    To solve for the displacement u from Eq. (2), we also need the constitutive relations, which maps the deformation history
of the structure to the stress:

        σ (t ) = M( (t ), I (t ))                                                                                                                        (3)


 2
   Exceptions exist, i.e., non-associate elasto-plasticity, where both symmetry and deﬁnite positiveness are lost, and bifurcations and possible instabilities
appear inside the plastic limit surface.
 3
   For brevity,  and σ represent both tensor form and vector form in Voigt notation depending on the context.


                                                                              3
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                       Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


Here  (t ) is the strain tensor at time t related to the displacement vector and I (t ) denotes all other quantities related to
material states during time τ = [0, t ), such as  (τ ), σ (τ ), etc. The inﬁnitesimal strain tensor is
                         1
          =  (u) = [∇ u + (∇ u)T ]
                         2
   When we apply the ﬁnite element method to solve Eq. (2) numerically, we have the following semi-discrete equation at
time t

         Mü + P(u, M( (u), I )) = f(u, x, p )                                                                                                    (4)
where we use the same notation u to denote the spatial discretization of the displacement vector u in Eq. (2), M is the
discrete mass matrix, P and f are the discrete internal and external force vectors, x is the coordinate vector, and p is
the parameter vector of external loads. We adopt the generalized α -method [25] with αm = −1 and α f = 0 for temporal
discretization of Eq. (4). This generalized α -method allows for dissipating high frequency energy to damp high frequency
modes, which is crucial for the robustness of the numerical solver when an approximate constitutive relation is used.

Remark 1. For structure undergoing ﬁnite or large deformations, the ﬁnite strain tensor reads
                         1
          =  (u) = [∇ u + (∇ u)T + (∇ u)T ∇ u]                                                                                                   (5)
                         2
σ in Eq. (2) represents the ﬁrst Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, the constitutive relation generally relates the ﬁnite strain tensor
with the symmetric second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor

         S (t ) = M( (t ), I (t ))                                                                                                                (6)
The ﬁrst Piola-Kirchhoff tensor and the second Piola-Kirchhoff tensor are related by

         σ = FS
here F = ∇ u + I is the deformation gradient tensor, where I is the identity matrix.
   Our method works for both inﬁnitesimal and ﬁnite deformations. Numerical examples of structures undergoing ﬁnite
deformations are reported in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2.1, and examples using inﬁnitesimal deformations are reported in
other numerical examples.

2.2. Constitutive relations and associated constraints

    Eq. (3) represents one possible form of constitutive relations. Even when restricted to this speciﬁc form, the consti-
tutive relations can describe a great variety of material properties. Nevertheless, most of the constitutive relations share
extra constraints (i.e., objectivity, convex strain energy function, and second law of thermodynamics) that play signiﬁcant
roles in material stability and numerical stability. In what follows, several stability- and consistency-related constraints of
constitutive relations are discussed. These constraints should be considered in any data-driven constitutive models.

2.2.1. Hyperelastic materials
    The constitutive relations of hyperelastic materials are path-independent and are related to the strain-energy density
function ω( ),
               ∂ ω( )
         σ=                                                                                                                                        (7)
                 ∂
                                                                                                                                     ∂ 2 ω( )
In general, the strain-energy density function is assumed to be convex, namely, the tangent stiffness matrix ∂ 2  is sym-
metric positive deﬁnite (SPD). The assumption in one-dimensional is equivalent to that the strain-stress is monotonically
increasing.4 The convexity is crucial to both the stability of the material and also the numerical scheme.

2.2.2. Elasto-plastic materials
    The constitutive relations of elasto-plastic materials are rate-independent but path-dependent, and feature transition
between elastic and plastic behaviors. Namely, under loading, the material behaves elastically until the initial yield stress σY
is attained, and then undergoes permanent irreversible plastic deformations with further loading. The onset and continuance
of plastic deformation is governed by a yield function

         f (σ ) ≤ 0                                                                                                                                (8)


 4
     Exceptions exist, i.e., strain-softening [26], which is beyond the scope of the present work.


                                                                               4
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                     Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


For plastic deformation, the stress state must remain on the yield surface f = 0, thanks to hardening parameters; and for
elastic deformation, the yield function satisﬁes f < 0.
   The strain is assumed to be additively decomposed into elastic  e and plastic  p parts, as follows,

         = e +  p                                                                                                                             (9)

The constitutive relation relates the stress and the elastic part of the strain:

        σ = C e                                                                                                                               (10)

here C is the tangent stiffness tensor. The plastic strain rate is given by a ﬂow rule, i.e., the associative ﬂow rule as follows,

                    ∂f
        ˙ p = λ̇
                    ∂σ
where λ̇ is called the plastic rate parameter or the consistency parameter, which is non-zero only if f = 0.
  Naturally, the constitutive relation is written in the rate form
                         ⎧
                         ⎪C˙
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                                                              if f < 0
                         ⎨
        σ̇ = H˙ =               (C ∂∂ σf )(C ∂∂ σf )T                                                                                         (11)
                         ⎪
                         ⎪ C −  T                      ˙   if f = 0
                         ⎪
                         ⎩      ∂f    ∂f
                                    C∂σ         ∂σ

It is worth mentioning the tangent stiffness matrix H is symmetric positive semideﬁnite, and when strain hardening is
considered, it becomes SPD. The deﬁnite positiveness leads to the second order work criterion, proposed by Hill [27]:

                     1
        δ 2 W := σ̇ T · ˙ ≥ 0                                                                                                                 (12)
                     2
which is also a suﬃcient condition for uniqueness of the elasto-plastic boundary value problem (see [28,29]). Moreover, the
form in Eq. (11) implies time consistency, i.e., as  → 0, σ → 0, and also rate-independent,5 i.e., the tangent stiffness
matrix is independent of the strain or stress rate.

2.2.3. Associated constraints
    Based on the discussion above, the following properties are crucial to be incorporated in data-driven constitutive models:

(1) Symmetry positive deﬁniteness of the tangent stiffness matrix (i.e., strain energy convexity), which leads to non-singular
    stiffness matrix. We also found that the SPD property is crucial for numerical stability.
(2) Time consistency, which is formulated as follows,

               lim σ = 0                                                                                                                      (13)
               →0

     It is crucial for the convergence of the numerical approximation when t −
                                                                              → 0.

3. Methodology

   In this section, we describe our method for learning the constitutive relations (3) and (6). Our discussion will be divided
into two parts:

 1. the neural network architecture for approximating the mapping between the strain and the stress;
 2. the direct and indirect training methods based on the types of available data.

3.1. Neural network architectures

    We note that the neural network has already been used to approximate the constitutive relations. The neural network
architectures in many literatures output stress directly (σ -NN) with the following form (recall that I stands for other
relevant information up to the current time)

        σ -NN:           σ = NNθ ( , I )                                                                                                      (14)


  5
    Strictly speaking, rate independency implies homogeneity, namely the stiffness tensor must be homogeneous of degree 0 and be dependent only on
the direction of strain rate or stress rate.


                                                                         5
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                          Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


or output stress increment directly (σ -NN):

        σ -NN:           σ = NNθ ( , I )                                                                                                         (15)

Note that ( , I ) is an abstract description of the neural network dependencies, which may include the strain rate informa-
                                            
tion ˙ , or directional information             .
                                            
  These architectures are suitable for learning the constitutive relations when the strain and the stress data are available.
However, these strain-stress relations expressed by Eqs. (14) and (15) do not satisfy certain physical constraints and thus
may break numerical solvers (see Section 4.1), when we plug them into a numerical solver.
  We propose an alternative architecture (SPD-NN) based on the incremental form,

        σ = Hθ  = Lθ LθT 
                                                                                                                                                    (16)
          Lθ = NNθ ( , I )

Here instead of outputting the stress or stress increment directly, the neural network outputs a lower triangular matrix Lθ ,
which is the Cholesky factor of the tangent stiffness matrix Hθ . The numerical approximation to Eq. (16) in the dynamic
simulations has the following form

        σ n+1 = Lθ LθT ( n+1 −  n ) + σ n                                                                                                         (17)

here, the superscript n indicates the time step.
   An obvious advantage of Eq. (16) is the guarantee that the tangent stiffness matrix is a symmetric semideﬁnite matrix,
which is true for commonly used constitutive relations (i.e., hyperelasticity and associate elasto-plasticity). Additionally,
when NNθ is bounded, we have

         lim σ = 0                                                                                                                                 (18)
         →0

which proves the time-consistency for both path-dependent/independent constitutive relations. In contrast, both the σ -NN
with σ n+1 = NNθ ( n+1 ,  n , σ n ) and the σ -NN with

        σ n+1 = NNθ ( n+1 ,  n , σ n ) + σ n
fail to satisfy the time-consistency condition equation (18) for path-dependent constitutive relations.
    In the following, we discuss how to adapt SPD-NN for different materials.

  • Linear Elasticity
     For linear elastic material, the tangent stiffness matrix is independent of the strain or stress. Therefore, no neural
     network is needed, and the constitutive relation reads

              σ n+1 = Cθ  n+1                                                                                                                      (19)

    where Cθ is the parametric tangent stiffness tensor and the unknowns are simply entries in the tensor (no neural
    network).
  • Nonlinear Elasticity
    For nonlinear elastic material, the tangent stiffness matrix equation (7) depends only on the strain at the current time
    step. The constitutive relation (17) can be formulated as

              σ n+1 = Lθ ( n+1 )Lθ ( n+1 )T ( n+1 −  n ) + σ n                                                                                  (20)

    Note the input  n+1 must be evaluated at the current time step n + 1 because it is impossible to determine the stress
    at time step n + 1 given only the information at time step n.
  • Elasto-Plasticity
    For elasto-plastic material, the material behavior features transition from elastic behavior to plastic behavior. To model
    this effect, we consider two types of constitutive relations:
    1. In the linear elasticity region, the constitutive relation is approximated by

                     +1
                 σ nelasticity = Cθ ( n+1 −  n ) + σ n                                                                                            (21)

     2. In the plasticity region, the constitutive relation is approximated by

                     +1
                 σ nplasticity = Lθ ( n+1 ,  n , σ n )Lθ ( n+1 ,  n , σ n )T ( n+1 −  n ) + σ n                                               (22)

                                                                               6
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 2. An exemplary transition function D (σ , σ̃Y ) = sigmoid 100(σ 2 − σ̃Y2 ) and σ̃Y = 1. Here sigmoid is the sigmoid function sigmoid(x) = (1 +
e −x )−1 .


       However, since we do not know when the transition occurs (the yield strength σY is not available and strain hardening
       could strength the material), we can relax the constitutive relation using a differentiable6 transition function D (σ n , σ̃Y )
       (see Fig. 2), whose value is between 0 and 1, as follows,

                                                 +1                            +1
                 σ n+1 = (1 − D (σ n , σ̃Y ))σ nelasticity + D (σ n , σ̃Y )σ nplasticity                                                                (23)

       here σ̃Y is the estimated yield strength, which does not need to be accurate. When the equivalent stress estimated
       from σ n (such as von Mises stress)7 is smaller than σ̃Y , the material behavior is assumed to be linear and described
       by Eq. (21); otherwise, it is assumed to be described by the plastic form equation (22). It is worth noting the plastic
       form equation (22) can degenerate to the linear elastic form equation (21), but not vice versa. Therefore, the esti-
       mated yield strength σ̃Y should be smaller than the yield strength σY . In the present study, historical data for plastic
       form equation (22) span only one time step, more historical data might be needed for materials with strong hysteresis.

Remark 2. Strictly speaking, the stiffness tensor Lθ LθT must be homogeneous of degree 0 and be dependent only on the
direction of strain rate or stress rate:

               n +1 −  n        σ n +1 − σ n
                            ,
              n+1 −  n       σ n+1 − σ n 
In the implementation, we use the formulation equation (22) for simplicity.

Remark 3. Generally, we can write the strain-stress relations for a linear elastic material in Voigt notation, as follows:
             ⎡
               σ11 ⎤ ⎡ C 1111 C 1122 C 1133              C 1123    C 1113    C 1112
                                                                                    ⎤⎡
                                                                                        11   ⎤
             ⎢ σ22 ⎥ ⎢        C 2222 C 2233              C 2223    C 2213    C 2212 ⎥ ⎢ 22 ⎥
             ⎢     ⎥ ⎢                                                              ⎥⎢       ⎥
             ⎢ σ33 ⎥ ⎢               C 3333              C 3323    C 3313    C 3312 ⎥ ⎢ 33 ⎥
             ⎢     ⎥=⎢                                                              ⎥⎢       ⎥
             ⎢ σ23 ⎥ ⎢                                   C 2323    C 2313    C 2312 ⎥ ⎢ 223 ⎥
             ⎣σ ⎦ ⎣           symm                                 C 1313    C 1312
                                                                                    ⎦ ⎣ 213
                                                                                             ⎦
                13
               σ12                                                           C 1212     212
The corresponding Cholesky factor Lθ of Cθ is a full lower triangular matrix. For the materials considered in the present
work, they are orthotropic, i.e., they have three mutually orthogonal planes of reﬂection symmetry. Thus the tangent stiffness
matrix can be expressed by a block diagonal matrix (Orth-NN), when orthotropy axes are used to form an orthogonal frame:
                   ⎡                                                            ⎤
                       C 1111   C 1122   C 1133
                  ⎢             C 2222   C 2233                                 ⎥
                  ⎢                                                             ⎥
                  ⎢                      C 3333                                 ⎥
             Cθ = ⎢                                                             ⎥
                  ⎢                                C 2323                       ⎥
                  ⎣             symm                         C 1313
                                                                                ⎦
                                                                       C 1212


  6
    The differentiability of the transition function is necessary since we need to evaluate the gradient of σ n+1 with respect to σ n during the training with
indirect data.
  7
    In general, D should depend on σ n+1 instead of σ n . Because it is diﬃcult to express σ n+1 explicitly using this form, we assume σ n+1 ≈ σ n and thus
obtain Eq. (23).


                                                                                7
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                     Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


Therefore, the associated Cholesky factor Lθ has the following form
                ⎡                                                                         ⎤
                  L 1111
                ⎢ L 2211        L 2222                                                    ⎥
                ⎢                                                                         ⎥
                ⎢ L 3311        L 3322      L 3333                                        ⎥
        Lθ = ⎢                                                                            ⎥                                                    (24)
                ⎢                                        L 2323                           ⎥
                ⎣                                                      L 1313
                                                                                          ⎦
                                                                                L 1212

Consequently, we can further simplify the neural network outputs to only the nonzero entries in Eq. (24). Eq. (24) is the
form of the Cholesky factor used in the present work.

Remark 4. Bringing the rate form of Eq. (16) into Eq. (12) leads to

        1
            σ̇ T · ˙ = ˙ T Lθ LθT ˙ ≥ 0
        2
Therefore, our proposed SPD-NN architecture equation (16) is fully consistent with the second order work criterion.

3.2. Training methods

   Based on the types of available data, i.e., direct and indirect, we can employ different training methods. For the following
discussion, we summarize the neural network based constitutive relations as follows
                                   ⎧
                                   ⎪     n +1
                                   ⎨Cθ                                                           Linear Elasticity
          n +1        n +1 n  n           n +1      n +1 T   n +1
        σ      = Mθ ( ,  , σ ) := Lθ ( )Lθ ( ) (               − )+σ
                                                                       n        n
                                                                                                  Nonlinear Elasticity
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎩(1 − D (σ n , σ̃ ))σ n+1                           n +1
                                                    Y    elasticity
                                                                    + D (σ n
                                                                             , σ̃ Y )σ plasticity
                                                                                                  Elasto-Plasticity

3.2.1. Direct data
    Direct data consist of the input and the output of the NN-based constitutive relations such as strain-stress pairs or strain-
stress increments pairs. These data points come from experimental measurements and numerical simulation results. The
comprehensive strain-stress data measurement relying on simple mechanical tests, such as tensile or bending tests, might
be challenging. However, comprehensive strain-stress data generated from sub-scale simulations, such as representative
volume element (RVE) simulations [30–34] or post-processed from direct numerical simulations, are widely used to train
neural networks [13,14,21,6].
    Mathematically, the direct data are given in terms of N sequences of strain-stress pairs at n time snapshots.

        ( 1j , σ 1j ), ( 2j , σ 2j ), · · · , ( nj , σ nj )      j = 1, 2, 3, . . . , N

Here the superscripts indicate time and the subscripts indicate the sequential number. We train the neural network by
solving a minimization problem

                                    n 
                                   N                                                     2
        arg min L(θ) :=                          σ ij − Mθ ( ij ,  ij−1 , σ ij−1 )                                                           (25)
                θ
                                   j =1 i =2


3.2.2. Indirect data
    Indirect data consist of deformation data from structure coupons under different load conditions. Deformations are
measured by techniques such as digital image correlation or grid method [35]. These techniques can record complete het-
erogeneous ﬁelds, which are rich in the constitutive relations. The virtual ﬁelds method [17,36–38] has been designed to
apply the ﬁnite element method (FEM) to bridge the full-ﬁeld data with parametric constitutive relations. Recently, the
method is generalized to an end-to-end training procedure to learn neural-network (or its counterparts) based constitutive
relations from the full-ﬁeld data [18].
    The indirect data are given by N full-ﬁeld deformation-load sequential data at n time snapshots

        (u1j , f1j ), (u2j , f2j ), · · · , (unj , fnj )         j = 1, 2, 3, . . . , N

Here the superscripts indicate time and the subscripts indicate the sequential number.
   We can compute the acceleration and the stress using the formulas

                        uij+1 − 2uij + uij−1
              üij :=                                                                                                                          (26)
                                    t 2
                                                                                               8
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




                   Fig. 3. The procedure of evaluating the residual Li at each time step for training with indirect data approach in Eq. (29).


        σ ij (θ ) := Mθ ( (uij ),  (uij−1 ), σ ij−1 (θ )), i = 2, . . . , n − 1                                                                        (27)
             ü1j = 0, u1j = 0, σ 1j (θ) = 0                                                                                                             (28)

Here t is the time step, which is assumed to be constant. We train the neural network by solving a minimization problem

                                  n −1 
                                 N                                            2
        arg min L(θ) :=                      Müij + P(uij , σ ij (θ)) − fij                                                                             (29)
               θ
                                 j =1 i =2

Here i is the index for time and j is the index for spacial degrees of freedom. It is worth mentioning, in Eq. (29), the
predicted stress σ ij (θ ) = Mθ ( (uij ),  (uij−1 ), σ ij−1 (θ )) depends on the predicted stress σ ij−1 (θ ) from the last time step. The
                                                                                       2
procedure of evaluating the residual Li = Müij + P(uij , σ ij (θ)) − fij                    at each time step in Eq. (29) is depicted in Fig. 3.
The procedure resembles the recurrent neural network in deep learning, where the state variables are the stresses. Like
the recurrent neural network, the stress predictions at different time steps must be sequentially computed and so do
the back-propagated gradients, and thus the computation is hard to be parallelized. Additionally, the training of recurrent
neural network suffers from exploding and vanishing gradients problem [39], which poses a challenge for indirect data
training of SPD-NNs as well. For example, when we train recurrent neural networks using gradient back-propagation, we
need to back-propagate the gradients layer by layer. When the tanh activation function is used, its derivative is close
to zero when the input to tanh is large. Therefore, the back-propagated gradients will possibly shrink layer after layer.
The small gradient makes the training process challenging. In other cases, when the RELU activation function is used, its
derivative is not contracted; therefore, back-propagation gradients can accumulate exponentially. This phenomenon is called
gradient explosion. There are many efforts for alleviating these problems. One notable technique is to simply back-propagate
the gradients for only a few layers instead of all of them. This technique results in an inaccurate gradient and thus its
effectiveness may be case dependent. Another approach is to carefully initialize the neural network. We employ the latter
approach in our present work.

3.3. Initialization for indirect data training

   Another notable challenge in training the recurrent neural network based constitutive relation is the existence of many
local minima, since the training data set is small in the present work, and different constitutive relations under the same
external loads may produce similar displacements. A common strategy to ﬁnd a good local minimum is to start from
multiple random weights and biases. However, this strategy is expensive and does not guarantee a good initial guess. We
thereby propose an initialization technique that yields a set of reasonably good initial weights and biases.
   The key idea is that according to Eq. (4), we have the relation between the internal force and the stress ﬁeld

        P(uij , σ ij ) = fij − Müij                                                                                                                     (30)

However, solving the stress ﬁeld σ ij from Eq. (30) is generally an underdetermined problem, since the number of equations
is fewer than the number of stress unknowns. To alleviate this, quadratic elements are used to represent the displacement
ﬁeld u, and in each quadratic element, a linear stress ﬁeld is assumed and approximated (see Fig. 4).
    The number of stress unknowns is roughly 3(nx + 1)(n y + 1) for a 2D plate, and 6(nx + 1)(n y + 1)(n z + 1) for a 3D
cube, the number of equations is roughly 2(2nx + 1)(2n y + 1) for a 2D plate, and 3(2nx + 1)(2n y + 1)(2n y + 1) for a 3D
cube. Here nx , n y , and n z represent the number of quadratic elements in each direction. Therefore, the number of equations
outnumbers the number of unknowns, and Eq. (30) becomes an overconstrained problem, the least-square ﬁtting is applied
for solving it. And then the stress ﬁeld is approximated linearly at each Gaussian point in each quadratic element.
    Once we solve for σ ij from Eq. (30), we can use the technique in Section 3.2.1 to pre-train the neural network. Although
the least square approximation of the stress ﬁeld is poor (the error can be larger than 100%), but the approximation is
qualitatively correct and suﬃcient for obtaining a good initial guess.

                                                                                    9
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                           Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 4. Schematic of the 2D quadratic element, with quadratic nodes (red circle) for displacements and linear nodes (blue empty square) for stress compo-
nents. (For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgures, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)




Fig. 5. 1D truss problem setup (left): the truss coupon consists of 4 elements with left end ﬁxed and force load on the right end; Extracted strain-stress
curves for different loading conditions (right).


4. Applications

    In this section, we present numerical results from solid mechanics for the proposed NN based constitutive relations:

  • Problem with a 1D truss coupon made of elasto-plastic materials under dynamic loading, which compares the proposed
    SPD-NN (17) and other neural network architectures, including σ -NN (14) and σ -NN (15).
  • Problems with 2D thin plates made of hyperelastic materials, elasto-plastic materials, and multiscale ﬁber-reinforced
     materials under dynamic loading, which demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed SPD-NN (17) for learning path-
     independent, path dependent (hysteresis), and multiscale constitutive relations.

In all problems, the training data and test data of the strain/stress ﬁelds and the displacement ﬁelds are generated numeri-
cally.

4.1. 1D trusses with elasto-plasticity

   In this section, we consider 1D truss elements with a length L x = 1 m, a cross section area A = 0.005 m2 and a density
8000 kg/m3 . The truss coupon, clamped on the left end, is tested under 5 loading conditions (see Fig. 5-left). The setting
corresponds to a uniaxial tensile test. The prescribed time-dependent load force t̄ consists of both loading and unloading
parts and takes the form
                             
                         tπ
        t̄ = p sin                , p = (0.4 tid + 1.6) × 106 N
                         T
here tid = 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 are the test indices. The total simulation time is T = 0.2 s. The case tid = 3 is used as test set and
all the other tests are used as training sets.
    The trusses are made of elasto-plastic materials. The Young’s modulus is

        E = 200 GPa

The yield function with isotropic hardening has the form

         f = |σ | − σ Y − K α

The yield strength is σY = 0.3 GPa, the plastic modulus is K = 200
                                                                9
                                                                   GPa, the internal hardening variable follows the simplest
evolutionary equation

        α̇ = λ̇

                                                                           10
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                            Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 6. The losses evaluated on the training set at each training iteration with SPD-NN (left), σ -NN (middle), and σ -NN (right) with different number of
layers for the 1D truss problem. Different curves correspond to different initial guesses.


    The truss coupon consists of 4 truss elements, which are modeled as geometric nonlinear truss elements [40, p. 63]. The
time step size is t = 0.001 s.
    As for the SPD-NN equation (23), the estimated Young’s modulus is assumed to be known, which can be separately
calibrated using small external loads (e.g., using the method proposed in [18]), and the estimated yield strength is σ̃Y =
0.1 GPa. The transition function is
                                                          
              n                           (σ n )2 − σ̃Y2
        D (σ , σ̃Y ) = sigmoid                                                                                                                        (31)
                                              dσ̃Y2
where d = 0.1 is the nondimensional parameter.
    Because the strain and stress pairs can be extracted from the uniaxial tensile tests, we can apply the direct input-output
data training method Section 3.2.1 to train the neural network. Fig. 5-right shows the strain-stress curves exhibiting plastic
loading and elastic unloading phenomena, which the neural networks are trained to learn. These curves start from the origin
and rise with the slope E in the linear elastic region, until the stress reaches the yield stress. Then the curves enter the
strain hardening region, where plastic deformations happen, until the elastic unloading. The slope of the unloading curve
is typically equal to the slope in the elastic (initial) region of the stress-strain curve. The plasticity deformations result
in permanent strains, which cannot be recovered by the elastic unloading. Since training neural networks involve highly
non-convex optimization problems, we start from 10 different initial weights for all NN training.
    To evaluate the quality of approximation, we propose two kinds of tests:

 1. NN test: extract the sequential strain-stress data ( i , σ i ) at each Gaussian quadrature point from the test data, and
    compare the predicted stress and the reference stress for each tuple ( i +1 ,  i , σ i ; σ i +1 ).
 2. NN-FEM test: embed the learned constitutive relation Mθ into the ﬁnite element framework, solve the governing equa-
    tion of the truss coupon under the corresponding loading condition, and ﬁnally compare the predicted strain-stress
    paths and the truss deformations.

Because the optimization results depend on the initial guess for the neural network weights and biases, we pick the neural
network with the minimal loss on the training set for the NN test and NN-FEM test. Other choices for selecting the candidate
neural networks such as cross-validation [41] can also be used. It is worth noting that NN-FEM test is more challenging than
the NN test, but is more relevant for predictive modeling. Indeed, the NN test does not take the numerical stability in the
predictive modeling into account and only evaluates the NN’s ability to ﬁt the strain-stress curve. As we will see in the
following examples, although SPD-NNs and other NN methods ﬁt the strain-stress curves equally well in the NN test, SPD-
NNs are signiﬁcantly preferable due to their predicting power in new scenarios.

4.1.1. Comparison of SPD-NN, σ -NN, and σ -NN
    The performance of the aforementioned neural network architectures, including the proposed SPD-NN, σ -NN and σ -
NN, with different hyper-parameters are compared. The neural networks considered contain 1, 2, 3 and 4 hidden layers
with 20 neurons in each layer, and tanh as the activation function is used. Both input and output are 1-dimensional. The
losses at each training step are reported in Fig. 6. Different initial weights lead to different local minima, as with any neural
network based data-driven approaches. And deeper neural networks perform better in terms of the training error. SPD-NN
achieves signiﬁcantly smaller training errors, compared with σ -NN and σ -NN.
    For the NN test, the predicted strain-stress relations are reported in Fig. 7. All deep neural networks (DNN) architec-
tures give good results. The predictions of different neural network architectures are all very accurate and the errors are
indiscernible in the plots.
    In the NN-FEM test, the ﬁnite-element code uses the DNN predictions for integrating the equations of motion. The
predicted displacement trajectories of the right end point and the predicted strain-stress curves for one Gaussian quadrature

                                                                            11
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




                         Fig. 7. The strain stress curve results for SPD-NN (left), σ -NN (middle), and σ -NN (right) in the NN test.




Fig. 8. Displacement trajectories of the right end point for SPD-NN (left), σ -NN (middle), and σ -NN (right) in the NN-FEM test. As can be seen, some of
the DNNs lead to unstable models as predicted by the second order work criterion.




Fig. 9. The strain stress curve of the NN-FEM test results obtained by using SPD-NN (left), σ -NN (middle), and σ -NN (right). The middle and right models
are unstable as predicted by the second order work criterion.



point on the right end element are reported in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. Most of σ -NN and σ -NN architectures are found to be
numerically unstable. We attribute the instability to the deviation of the strain and stress pairs in the test loading condition
from the training set, where the numerical errors are accumulated during the prediction process. More speciﬁcally, the
violation of SPD constraints on the tangent stiffness matrix for σ -NN or σ -NN makes them vulnerable to these errors
and less robust to even slight extrapolations. In contrast, the proposed SPD-NN, which is supposed to be stable inside the
plastic limit surface according to the second order work criterion (see Eq. (12)), delivers numerically stable results and the
predicted displacements and strain-stress curves overlap the exact ones.

4.1.2. Comparison of different neural network architectures for SPD-NN
    In this experiment, we consider different neural network architectures. We vary widths, depths and activation functions
of the neural network used in SPD-NN, while keeping other settings the same as Section 4.1.1. The errors in the NN-FEM test
in terms of mean squared errors of the predicted displacements at the ﬁnal time T are shown in Table 1. We see that the
tanh activation function is in general more accurate than others if appropriate widths and depths of the neural network
are chosen (for this case, the training set consists of 800 data, the number of neural network parameters is not supposed to
outnumber it too much). However, ReLU and leaky ReLU are more robust for deep and wide neural networks, despite being
less accurate.

                                                                              12
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


                                 Table 1
                                 Mean squared errors of the predicted displacements at the ﬁnal time T for different neural
                                 network architectures, including tanh, ReLU (rectiﬁed linear unit), ELU (exponential linear
                                 unit), SELU (scaled exponential linear unit), and leaky ReLU (leaky rectiﬁed linear unit) with
                                 leakage 0.1. The width is the number of activation nodes in each hidden layer. The depth
                                 is the number of hidden layers. “NaN” denotes the numerical simulation fails (e.g., due to
                                 numerical instability) using the trained NN-based constitutive relations.

                                                    Depth\Width      2              10            20             40
                                   tanh             1                1.1 × 10−5     4.2 × 10−5    2.0 × 10−5     3.0 × 10−5
                                                    3                4.7 × 10−5     1.8 × 10−6    1.3 × 10−6     NaN
                                                    8                5.5 × 10−4     1.3 × 10−5    NaN            NaN
                                                    20               8.8 × 10−6     5.9 × 10−5    NaN            NaN

                                   ReLU             1                9.3 × 10−3     3.7 × 10−5    6.1 × 10−5     4.2 × 10−3
                                                    3                9.3 × 10−3     3.1 × 10−3    4.7 × 10−3     5.3 × 10−3
                                                    8                9.1 × 10−3     1.8 × 10−4    6.1 × 10−3     1.0 × 10−2
                                                    20               3.5            5.9 × 10−6    3.3 × 10−3     NaN

                                   leaky ReLU       1                4.6 × 10−3     4.8 × 10−3    4.3 × 10−3     1.2 × 10−2
                                                    3                8.9 × 10−3     1.2 × 10−2    1.0 × 10−2     2.1 × 10−3
                                                    8                5.3 × 10−3     5.0 × 10−3    6.6 × 10−3     5.4 × 10−3
                                                    20               9.3 × 10−3     4.4 × 10−3    8.6 × 10−3     1.8 × 10−2

                                   SELU             1                1.0 × 10−2     6.6 × 10−4    2.2 × 10−4     2.2 × 10−4
                                                    3                9.6 × 10−3     9.8 × 10−5    4.3 × 10−4     3.8 × 10−4
                                                    8                9.2 × 10−5     7.6 × 10−3    4.8 × 10−5     NaN
                                                    20               8.3 × 10−6     5.8 × 10−5    NaN            NaN

                                   ELU              1                4.2 × 10−3     4.6 × 10−3    5.0 × 10−3     6.6 × 10−3
                                                    3                6.8 × 10−5     5.7 × 10−3    4.7 × 10−4     4.1 × 10−3
                                                    8                8.0 × 10−6     8.4 × 10−6    NaN            NaN
                                                    20               6.6 × 10−5     NaN           NaN            NaN




                                             Fig. 10. Impacts of σ̃Y and d on the approximation accuracy of SPD-NNs.



4.1.3. Choice of σ̃Y and d
    We consider the impact of σ̃Y and d in the transition function D (see Eq. (31))
                                                             
              n                              (σ n )2 − σ̃Y2
        D (σ , σ̃Y ) = sigmoid
                                                 d σ̃Y2

on the accuracy of the SPD-NN. As mentioned before, σ̃Y controls where the transition from the elastic form (Eq. (21)) to
the plastic form (Eq. (22)) happens and d controls the sharpness of the transition (see Fig. 2). In this numerical experiment,
we use a fully connected neural network with 3 hidden layers, 20 neurons in each layer, and the tanh activation function.
We vary σ̃Y and d in Eq. (31).
    The error plot is shown in Fig. 10, where the error metric is the same as Section 4.1.2. The reported errors are the average
errors of 10 simulations with different initial guesses. We can see that the accuracy of the SPD-NN is less sensitive to d.
Additionally, as long as we choose a small enough σ̃Y so that the corresponding plastic form (Eq. (22)) covers the plasticity
regime, the SPD-NN is suﬃciently expressive to approximate the constitutive relation. This justiﬁes our choices d = 0.1 and
σ̃Y = 0.1 GPa.

                                                                               13
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                       Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 11. Mean squared errors for different neural network models and training dataset sizes. We see that SPD-NN achieves best accuracy compared with
other models.



4.1.4. The effect of the training dataset
    In this experiment, we investigate the effect of the training dataset, including its size and distance to the test dataset,
on the performance of the aforementioned neural network models. The prescribed time-dependent load force t̄ consists of
both loading and unloading parts and takes the form
                                                           
                         tπ                    tid − 1
        t̄ = p sin                ,   p=                 + 1.6 × 106 N
                         T                       12

here tid = 1, 2, . . . , 25 are the test indices. The total simulation time is T = 0.2 s. The case tid = 13 is used as the test
dataset. For fairness, we start from the same deep neural network architecture (3 hidden layers, 20 neurons per layer,
tanh activation function) and weight initialization. We run the optimization for 30,000 iterations using the L-BFGS-B opti-
mizer.
   To understand the effect of the training dataset size, we train σ -NN, σ -NN, and SPD-NN using n datasets. In each case,
we use the following tids (test IDs)

  • n = 1; tid = 12
  • n = 2; tid = 10, 15
  • n = 4; tid = 1, 9, 17, 25
  • n = 9; tid = 3k + 1, k = 0, 1, . . . , 8
  • n = 14; tid = 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 19, 21, 23, 25
  • n = 24; tid = k, k = 13

The errors in the NN test (σ -NN and σ -NN suffer instability for the NN-FEM test) in terms of the mean squared errors of
the predicted stresses are presented in Fig. 11. See page 11 for a deﬁnition of these tests. Since tid = 13 does not appear
in the training dataset, the mean squared error can be interpreted as the test error. From Fig. 11, we can see that SPD-NN
outperforms both σ -NN and σ -NN for moderate dataset sizes. For small dataset sizes, SPD-NN can achieve reasonable
accuracy, except for the case where only 1 dataset is used. This illustrates that potentially our approach does not require
a large number of data to have good prediction power. This is beneﬁcial for engineering applications because, in practice,
data may be scarce or expensive to collect.
    To understand the effect of the distance between the training data and test data (or the quality of the training data) on
the performance of the aforementioned neural network models, we conduct the following experiments with small training
dataset sizes. The tids are indicated for each n:

  • n = 1; tid = 12.
  • n = 1; tid = 1. Note this dataset is far from the test dataset tid = 13.
  • n = 2; tid = 10, 15.
  • n = 2; tid = 1, 25. Note these two datasets are far from the test dataset tid = 13.

The mean squared errors are shown in Table 2. We can see that for all cases, using datasets that are closer to the test
dataset yields better test results. Therefore, we conclude that although more data help train SPD-NN better, the quality of
the training data also matters. And the SPD-NN is more robust with respect to the quality of the training dataset when a
moderate dataset size is used.

                                                                         14
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                                       Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


                                              Table 2
                                              Mean squared errors for small dataset sizes. Given the dataset size n, when
                                              the training dataset is close to the test dataset, the test errors are in general
                                              smaller.

                                                Training dataset     n=1                         n=2
                                                                      tid = 12    tid = 1        tid = 10, 15    tid = 1, 25
                                                σ -NN                 6.02        106365.00      0.13            86.50
                                                σ -NN                0.06        658.85         0.06            1.00
                                                SPD-NN                4.40        914.90         0.01            0.06




                                                 Fig. 12. Schematic of the boundary conditions of the thin plate tests.


4.2. 2D thin plate with different materials

    In this section, we consider thin plate coupons of size L x = 10 cm by L y = 5 cm with the plane stress assumption (L z =
0.1 cm). These plates are made of different materials, including hyperelastic material (ﬁnite deformation), elasto-plastic
material (inﬁnitesimal deformation), and ﬁber-reinforced multiscale elasto-plastic material (inﬁnitesimal deformation). For
each case, the plate is tested under 13 loading conditions as depicted in Fig. 12. The prescribed time-dependent load force
t̄ ∈ R2 consists of both loading and unloading parts and takes the form
                             
                         tπ
        t̄ = p sin
                         T

here p ∈ R2 is the loading parameter vector, as follows,

  • A) clamp on the bottom edge and impose force load on the top                √ edge.√
    A1: (0, p 1 ), A2: (0, − p 1 ), A3: ( p 3 , 0), A4: (− p 3 , 0), A5: ( p 3 / 2, p 1 / 2), and A6: (0.75p 3 , 0).
  • B) clamp on the left edge and impose force load on the right                √edge. √
    B1: ( p 1 , 0), B2: (− p 1 , 0), B3: (0, p 2 ), B4: (0, − p 2 ), B5: ( p 1 / 2, p 2 / 2), and B6: (0, 0.75p 2 ).
  • C) clamp
                on the left edge and    impose force load on the bottom edge.
                  p L             −(x−x0 )2
     C1:     0, √ 2 x exp                         , with x0 = 5L6 x and σ X = 0.2L x .
                  2πσ X               σ X2

The total simulation time is T = 0.2s. We use A1-A5 and B1-B5 as training data and A6, B6, and C1 as test data. Both
training procedures discussed in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 are applied. For the direct input-output data training, the strain-
stress sequential data are extracted from all Gaussian points in the training sets. For the indirect data training, the full-ﬁled
displacement ﬁelds on the 21 by 11 grid (0.5 cm interval) from the training data are extracted. Therefore, this approach is
potentially applicable to experimental data. The pre-training is required to obtain good initial guesses.

4.2.1. Hyperelasticity
    The plate is made of the incompressible Rivlin-Saunders material [42,43] with the density ρ = 800 kg/m3 and the energy
density function

        w = c 1 ( I 1 − 3) + c 2 ( I 2 − 3)

Here c 1 = 0.1863 MPa and c 2 = 0.00979 MPa, and I 1 , I 2 , I 3 are three scalar invariants of the right Cauchy-Green stretch
tensor C = F F T = 2 + 1, where
                                  1
        I 1 = trC         I2 =        [(trC )2 − trC 2 ]           I 3 = J 2 = det C
                                  2
The incompressibility implies that J = 1. The plate is assumed to undergo ﬁnite deformations (see Remark 1), and the
second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor reads

                                                                                     15
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                                Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 13. Top: Trajectories of displacement at top-right (red: u x , yellow: u y ) and top-middle points (blue: u x , green: u y ) of the 2D hyperelastic plate for
test A6 (left), B6 (middle) and C1 (right), deﬁned on page 15. The reference solutions are marked by empty circles, the solutions obtained by the SPD-NN
trained using indirect data are marked by solid lines, and the solutions obtained by SPD-NN trained with direct data are marked by dashed lines. Bottom:
The absolute errors of displacements for each case.


               ∂w     ∂J
        S=        +λJ                                                                                                                                       (32)
               ∂     ∂
here λ J is the Lagrangian multiplier, which can be calculated based on the plane stress assumption S 33 = 0. The plate
domain is discretized by 20 × 10 quadratic quadrilateral elements. The time step size is t = 0.001 s. The data sets are
generated with load parameters ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ) = (44800, 4480, 16800) N/m.
    Both the direct data training approach in Section 3.2.1 and the indirect data training approach in Section 3.2.2 are applied
to train a SPD-NN:

        S n+1 = Lθ ( n+1 )Lθ ( n+1 ) T ( n+1 −  n ) + S n                                                                                               (33)

where the neural network consists of 4 hidden layers and 20 neurons in each layer.
    The predicted trajectories of displacements at the top-right and top-middle points as a function of time and the refer-
ences for all test cases are depicted in Fig. 13. All predicted results are in good agreement with the references, and the
direct input-output data training approach leads to slightly better results for case C1. The predicted von Mises stress ﬁelds
at t = T2 for all test cases and the references are depicted in Fig. 14.

4.2.2. Elasto-plasticity
    The plate is made of titanium, which is assumed to be elasto-plastic material with density ρ = 4200 kg/m3 . The consti-
tutive relation is

        σ = C
here C denotes the isotropic plane stress stiffness tensor with Young’s modulus E = 100 GPa and Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.35.
The von Mises yield function with isotropic hardening has the form
               
         f =        2
                   σ11 − σ11 σ22 + σ22
                                    2
                                       + 3σ12
                                           2
                                              − σY − K α                                                                                                    (34)

The yield strength σY = 0.97 GPa and the plastic modulus K = 10 GPa, the internal hardening variable α follows the
simplest evolutionary equation

        α̇ = λ̇                                                                                                                                             (35)

This plate domain is discretized by 20 × 10 quadratic quadrilateral elements. And the time step size is t = 0.001 s.

                                                                               16
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 14. The von Mises stress (MPa) ﬁelds at t = T2 for the 2D hyperelastic plate for test A6 (top), B6 (middle) and C1 (bottom), deﬁned on page 15. From left
to right: reference solutions (on a ﬁne mesh), solutions obtained by SPD-NN trained with direct data, solutions obtained by SPD-NN trained with indirect
data.


    As for the SPD-NN equation (23), the estimated yield strength is σ̃Y = 0.32GPa, the transition function is
                                                        
                                     σ n 2 − σ̃ 2
        D (σ  n
              vm ,   σ̃Y ) = sigmoid vm 2 Y
                                        dσ̃Y
       n
here σvm is the computed von Mises stress at the previous time step and d = 0.1 denotes the nondimensional parameter.
The tangent stiffness matrix Cθ in the linear region is ﬁrst estimated as following, and then used as constant in Eq. (23).

Linear region. The data sets are generated with load parameters

        ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ) = (0.16, 0.016, 0.06) GN/m
which are small enough to maintain the deformations in the linear region.
    The indirect data training approach in Section 3.2.2 is applied to extract the tangent stiffness matrix, and we obtain the
following estimation
                ⎡                                                                  ⎤
              1.04064 × 106             2.09077 × 105                0.0
            ⎣
        Cθ = 2.09077 × 105              1.041146 × 106               0.0       ⎦                                                                        (36)
                   0.0                        0.0               4.19057 × 10 5


Based on Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the material, the tangent stiffness matrix is
                 ⎡                                                                 ⎤
                 1.04167 × 106           2.08333 × 105              0.0
        Cref = ⎣ 2.08333 × 105           1.04167 × 106              0.0      ⎦                                                                          (37)
                      0.0                     0.0              4.16667 × 105

                                                                             17
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                                  Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 15. Trajectories of displacement at top-right (red: u x , yellow: u y ) and top-middle points (blue: u x , green: u y ) of the 2D elasto-plastic plate for test
A6 (left), B6 (middle) and C1 (right), deﬁned on page 15. The reference solutions are marked by empty circles, the solutions obtained by the CholNN trained
using indirect data are marked by solid lines, and the solutions obtained by CholNN trained with direct data are marked by dashed lines. Note that the
plasticity model takes into account the full history of the deformation while the DNN models take as input only the value from the last step.



For each component, the relative error is less than one percent. These errors are introduced by the discretization, including
the interpolation of the displacement ﬁeld on the observation grid and the estimation of the acceleration equation (26). It
is worth mentioning, the direct input-output data training delivers exactly the same stiffness matrix as the reference.

Nonlinear region. The data sets are generated with load parameters

        ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ) = (1.6, 0.16, 0.6) GN/m
which are 10 times larger than these in the linear region. Both direct input-output data training (Section 3.2.1) and indirect
data training (Section 3.2.2) are applied to train a SPD-NN with 5 hidden layers and 20 neurons in each layer. The predicted
trajectories of the displacements at top-right and top-middle points for all test cases are depicted in Fig. 15, along with the
references. SPD-NNs trained with both methods are able to predict the initial elastic behavior, the strain-hardening region,
and the unloading behavior. The SPD-NN obtained by the direct input-output data training performs better especially for
the prediction of the yield strength the strain-hardening behavior. The predicted von Mises stress ﬁelds at t = T2 and the
references for all test cases are depicted in Fig. 16. Reasonable agreements are achieved.

4.2.3. Multiscale ﬁber reinforced elasto-plasticity
    The plate is made of the titanium—the same as Section 4.2.2—but reinforced by ﬁbers made of SiC, which are assumed
to be isotropic and elastic with

        ρ = 3200 kg/m3 , E = 400 GPa, and ν = 0.35
These ﬁbers are square shaped and uniformly distributed in the plate, with a diameter d = 0.25 cm and a fraction 25%.
There are in total 800 ﬁbers, as shown in Fig. 17. This plate domain is discretized by 200 × 400 quadratic quadrilateral
elements, and 25 elements for each ﬁber. And the time step size is t = 0.001 s.
   As for training SPD-NNs, the estimated yield strength and the transition function are the same as these in Section 4.2.2.
The tangent stiffness matrix Cθ in the linear region is ﬁrst calibrated and then ﬁxed as constant in Eq. (23) when training
the SPD-NN.

Linear region. The data sets are generated with load parameters

        ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ) = (0.16, 0.016, 0.06) GN/m
which are small enough to maintain the deformations in the linear region. The indirect data training approach in Sec-
tion 3.2.2 is applied to extract the following predicted tangent stiffness matrix,
                ⎡                                                                       ⎤
              1.335174 × 106               3.26448 × 105                 0.0
            ⎣
        Cθ = 3.26448 × 105                 1.326879 × 106                0.0      ⎦                                                                           (38)
                    0.0                          0.0                5.26955 × 105

The predicted linear constitutive relation equation (19) is veriﬁed on the test set. The predicted displacements at top-right
and top-middle points as a function of time and the references for all test cases are depicted in Fig. 18. The corresponding
von Mises stress ﬁelds at t = T2 are reported in Fig. 19. The SPD-NN based homogenized model delivers similar results as
the high-resolution multiscale model.

                                                                                18
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                            Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 16. The von Mises stress (GPa) ﬁelds at t = T2 for the 2D elasto-plastic plate for test A6 (top), B6 (middle) and C1 (bottom), deﬁned on page 15.
From left to right: reference solutions (on a ﬁne mesh), solutions obtained by SPD-NN trained with direct data, solutions obtained by SPD-NN trained with
indirect data.




                                              Fig. 17. Schematic of the ﬁber (orange) reinforced thin plate.


Nonlinear region. The data sets are generated with load parameters

        ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ) = (1.6, 0.16, 0.6) GN/m
which are 10 times larger than those in the linear region. Only the indirect data training approach is applied to train a
SPD-NN with 5 hidden layers and 20 neurons in each layer. To enable direct input-output data training, homogenization is
required to generate strain-stress data from RVE simulations [13,14,21,6], or extract strain-stress data from direct numerical
simulations. This may be challenging in the context of experimental data, which necessitates the indirect training approach.
   The predicted trajectories of displacements at top-right and top-middle points for all test cases are depicted in Fig. 20,
along with the references. Comparing with the previous elasto-plasticity case, all displacements are smaller due to the

                                                                           19
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                                  Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 18. Trajectories of displacement at top-right (red: u x , yellow: u y ) and top-middle points (blue: u x , green: u y ) of the 2D multiscale plate in the linear
region for test A6 (left), B6 (middle) and C1 (right), deﬁned on page 15. The reference solutions are marked by empty circles and the solutions obtained by
the SPD-NN trained with indirect data are marked by solid lines.




Fig. 19. The von Mises stress (GPa) ﬁelds at t = T2 for the 2D multiscale plate in the linear region for test A6 (top), B6 (middle) and C1 (bottom), deﬁned
on page 15. From left to right: reference solutions (on a ﬁber-resolved mesh) and solutions obtained by SPD-NN trained with indirect data.



SiC ﬁber reinforcement. The proposed SPD-NN gives a satisfactory approximation of the initial elastic behavior, the strain-
hardening region, and the following unloading behavior. The predicted von Mises stress ﬁelds at t = T2 and the references
for all test cases are depicted in Fig. 21. The predicted and simulated homogenized stress ﬁelds are in reasonably good
agreement. Although the solutions obtained by SPD-NNs do not capture local large stress concentrations near each ﬁber (at
the level of the microstructure), the local recovery techniques [44] can be applied to estimate these local stress concen-
trations. For example, a RVE simulation can be conducted to estimate local stresses using the local strain from the coarse
homogenized solution.

                                                                                 20
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                                  Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 20. Trajectories of displacement at top-right (red: u x , yellow: u y ) and top-middle points (blue: u x , green: u y ) of the 2D multiscale plate in nonlinear
region for test A6 (left), B6 (middle) and C1 (right), deﬁned on page 15. The reference solutions are marked by empty circles and the solutions obtained by
the SPD-NN trained with indirect data are marked by solid lines.




Fig. 21. The von Mises stress (GPa) ﬁelds at t = T2 for the 2D multiscale plate in nonlinear region for test A6 (top), B6 (middle) and C1 (bottom), deﬁned
on page 15. From left to right: reference solutions (on a ﬁber-resolved mesh) and solutions obtained by SPD-NN trained with indirect data.


Accelerating simulations with neural network surrogates for constitutive modeling. It is also worth noting that each SPD-NN-
based simulation is several order magnitude faster than the corresponding ﬁber resolved simulations. The CPU times for
both the SPD-NN-based simulations and ﬁber resolved simulations are shown in Fig. 22. Note as we increase the external
load, the CPU time increases because more elements undergo plastic deformations, which requires more expensive Raphson-
Newton iterations in the numerical simulations. Still, the dramatic acceleration from around 24 hours to just a few minutes
is impressive. However, the acceleration should be carefully interpreted in the context of surrogate models. First, the cur-
rent benchmarks are based on serial execution, where the state-of-the-art FEM simulations usually involve parallelization.
Nevertheless, these parallelization techniques for ﬁber resolved simulations are also directly applicable to SPD-NNs. Second,
the speed of the ﬁber resolved simulations depends on the required resolution (e.g., the resolution on each ﬁber). If we use

                                                                                21
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                     Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072




Fig. 22. CPU time for simulations using ﬁber resolved DNS (direct numerical simulation) and the SPD-NN surrogate model. The same color denotes the
same test case (C1, A6, or B6).



very coarse grids, the speed of the ﬁber resolved simulations may be comparable to or even faster than the SPD-NN-based
simulations, though the coarse grids raise concerns for accuracy. Third, we have not compared the present model with other
state-of-the-art accelerating techniques for multiscale modeling, for example projection-based model order reduction [45]
and self-consistent clustering [46]. Finally, as with any NN-based surrogate models, the SPD-NN only works on test data
that does not deviate too much from the training data, while ﬁber resolved simulations are usually considered to be general
and applicable in a much wider context.

5. Discussion of neural networks

   The introduction and benchmarking of SPD-NNs raise many questions, some of which are partially answered in this
paper while some others are worthwhile to be investigated further. We believe that the following discussion is important
and central to the application of NN-based constitutive modeling and should be careful dealt for the development of SPD-
NNs and other NN-based approaches.

Function approximators. In the present work, neural network is used as a basis function to approximate a complex con-
stitutive relation, the strain-stress relation. Many other basis functions, including piecewise linear functions, radial basis
functions, and radial basis function networks, can also be applied for the approximation of the Cholesky factor. The choice
of neural networks is well-versed and justiﬁed by the following three reasons.

  • First, the distribution of the strain data—the input to the neural network—is determined by experiment records, which
    in general does not evenly spread over the domain. The comparison study presented in [18] illustrates that neural
    network outperforms the other basis functions in terms of regularization and generalization properties when the data
    distribution is ill-behaved.
  • Second, the strain-stress curves are non-smooth in the context of plastic deformations and elastic unloading. As a result
    of the non-smoothness, the approximation eﬃciency of typical basis functions is usually compromised. Nevertheless,
    neural networks exhibit the potential to capture the sharp transitions in the strain-stress relations and performs rea-
    sonably well for the non-smooth data.
  • Third, the input and the output dimensions are relatively high (e.g., the input is 9D and the output is 4D in the elasto-
    plasticity and the multi-scale cases), which poses a challenge for traditional basis functions. For example, if we were to
    use the linear basis functions, to discretize the high dimensional input space, even if we only have 10 grid points per
    dimension, the total degree of freedom is 109 , which is too costly regarding both the computation and the storage. Yet,
    neural networks are particularly convenient and useful for expressing mappings between high dimensional spaces [47]
    and require no mesh in the input parameter domain.

All the aforementioned reasons motivate us to use neural networks in this work.

Optimization method. Most of neural networks in literature, especially in computer science communities, are trained with
stochastic gradient methods (SGD). In our present work and the previous work [18], the optimization of the loss func-
tions (25) and (29) is done by the Limited-memory BFGS (L-BFGS-B) method [48] with the line search routine in [49],
which attempts to enforce the Wolfe conditions [48] by a sequence of polynomial interpolations. Note BFGS is applicable in
our case since the data sets are typically small and the neural network is reasonably deep and wide; otherwise, the memory
requirement of L-BFGS-B is so high that SGD or other similar ﬁrst-order methods for training neural networks should be

                                                                       22
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                        Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


adopted. It is worth mentioning that the choice of BFGS optimizer is well-motivated and has long been adopted for scientiﬁc
and engineering applications due to its fast convergence and robustness.

Data scaling. We observed that input data scaling signiﬁcantly helps train SPD-NNs faster, reduces overﬁtting, and makes
better predictions. In the present work, the inputs and outputs of the neural network are scaled to a similar magnitude.
Speciﬁcally, we introduce a strain reference ref and a stress reference σref to scale strains and stresses. We also scale the
                            σ
tangent stiffness matrix by  ref . For example, in the elasto-plasticity case, the Cholesky factor has the form
                                      ref

                                     
                   i  i −1 σ i −1
        Lθ           ,      ,
                 ref ref σref
                                            σ
The most important thing is that  ref ∼ O ( E ), here E is the estimated Young’s modulus. This guarantees the inputs for
                                      ref
SPD-NN, especially for elasto-plasticity, ( i ,  i −1 , σ i −1 ) have similar magnitudes.

Local minima. Local minima are observed in Section 4.1, since training neural networks involve highly non-convex opti-
mization problems. Although neural networks with minimal losses on the training set from 10 different initial weights
perform well, neural networks with median losses are less satisfactory. This reveals the uncertainty with respect to the ini-
tial weights for most NN-based data-driven approaches. Wider neural networks will be considered in the future, since some
theoretical and computational results [50,51] show quality of local minima tends to improve toward the global minimum
value as depths and widths increase. As for the indirect data training approach, pre-training approach (see Section 3.2.2)
produces acceptable initial weights and thus mitigates this concern. For all these training processes, the optimization is
terminated when the objective function is called 3,000 times and 50,000 times for pre-training and training, respectively.
The direct input-output data training is about 4 times faster than the indirect data training.

6. Conclusion

    Data-driven approaches continue to gain popularity for constructing constitutive models from high-ﬁdelity simulations
and high-resolution experiments. The incorporation of data-driven constitutive models into conservation equations leads to
a hybrid model, namely a coupled system with differential equations to describe conservation laws and thermodynamic
principles, and neural networks to describe the material properties.
    To make these hybrid models numerically more robust, we introduced a novel neural network architecture, SPD-NN, in
which the neural network outputs the Cholesky factor of the tangent stiffness matrix instead of the stress or the stress
increment. This neural network architecture weakly imposes convexity on the strain energy function (i.e., SPD tangent
stiffness matrix). The incremental form of SPD-NN also preserves the time consistency and fulﬁlls the second order work
criterion. We tested SPD-NN-based constitutive relations on a 1D elasto-plastic truss problem and several 2D plate problems
in which the plate is made of hyperelastic, elasto-plastic, and multiscale ﬁber-reinforced materials. When contrasting the
SPD-NN with two other neural network architectures, we showed that SPD-NN exhibits better numerical stability in the
resulting hybrid models. The general training approach and the improved numerical stability will allow extending SPD-
NNs to other time-dependent physical systems, such as viscoelastic materials, where the constitutive relations are rate-
dependent, and plastic materials with stronger hysteresis, where more history-dependent variables are required.
    However, one limitation of the current approach is that the training process requires full-ﬁeld data, either for strain-
stress pairs or displacement measurements. This is especially challenging for a 3D solid body, where the measurements may
only be made on the surface (although by using techniques such as X-ray computer tomograph [52], we can obtain full
ﬁeld displacements or strain ﬁelds induced by loading). NN-based constitutive modeling with incomplete data remains to
be investigated in the future.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

   Kailai Xu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation, Writing, Visualization, Funding acquisition,
Formal analysis, Resources, Data curation.
   Daniel Huang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Writing, Visualization, Formal analysis, Data
curation.
   Eric Darve: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisi-
tion.

Declaration of competing interest

   The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

                                                              23
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


Acknowledgements

    This work is supported by the Applied Mathematics Program within the Department of Energy (DOE) Oﬃce of Advanced
Scientiﬁc Computing Research (ASCR), through the Collaboratory on Mathematics and Physics-Informed Learning Machines
for Multiscale and Multiphysics Problems Research Center (DE-SC0019453).

References

 [1] J. Ghaboussi, J.H. Garrett Jr., Xiping Wu, Knowledge-based modeling of material behavior with neural networks, J. Eng. Mech. 117 (1) (1991) 132–153.
 [2] G.W. Ellis, C. Yao, Rui Zhao, D. Penumadu, Stress-strain modeling of sands using artiﬁcial neural networks, J. Geotech. Eng. 121 (5) (1995) 429–435.
 [3] Yuelin Shen, K. Chandrashekhara, W.F. Breig, L.R. Oliver, Finite element analysis of v-ribbed belts using neural network based hyperelastic material
     model, Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 40 (6) (2005) 875–890.
 [4] Guanghui Liang, K. Chandrashekhara, Neural network based constitutive model for elastomeric foams, Eng. Struct. 30 (7) (2008) 2002–2011.
 [5] Tomonari Furukawa, Genki Yagawa, Implicit constitutive modelling for viscoplasticity using neural networks, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 43 (2) (1998)
     195–219.
 [6] Kun Wang, WaiChing Sun, A multiscale multi-permeability poroplasticity model linked by recursive homogenizations and deep learning, Comput.
     Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 334 (2018) 337–380.
 [7] M. Mozaffar, R. Bostanabad, W. Chen, K. Ehmann, J. Cao, M.A. Bessa, Deep learning predicts path-dependent plasticity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 (52)
     (2019) 26414–26420.
 [8] F. Ghavamian, A. Simone, Accelerating multiscale ﬁnite element simulations of history-dependent materials using a recurrent neural network, Comput.
     Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 357 (2019) 112594.
 [9] Panagiotis G. Asteris, Vagelis Plevris, Anisotropic masonry failure criterion using artiﬁcial neural networks, Neural Comput. Appl. 28 (8) (2017)
     2207–2229.
[10] Somdatta Goswami, Cosmin Anitescu, Souvik Chakraborty, Timon Rabczuk, Transfer learning enhanced physics informed neural network for phase-ﬁeld
     modeling of fracture, Theor. Appl. Fract. Mech. (2019) 102447.
[11] Jakub Gajewski, Tomasz Sadowski, Sensitivity analysis of crack propagation in pavement bituminous layered structures using a hybrid system integrat-
     ing artiﬁcial neural networks and ﬁnite element method, Comput. Mater. Sci. 82 (2014) 114–117.
[12] Xin Liu, Fei Tao, Wenbin Yu, A neural network enhanced system for learning nonlinear constitutive relation of ﬁber reinforced composites, in: AIAA
     Scitech 2020 Forum, 2020, 0396.
[13] B.A. Le, Julien Yvonnet, Q.-C. He, Computational homogenization of nonlinear elastic materials using neural networks, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng.
     104 (12) (2015) 1061–1084.
[14] M.A. Bessa, R. Bostanabad, Z. Liu, A. Hu, Daniel W. Apley, C. Brinson, Wei Chen, Wing Kam Liu, A framework for data-driven analysis of materials under
     uncertainty: countering the curse of dimensionality, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 320 (2017) 633–667.
[15] Chun-Teh Chen, Grace X. Gu, Generative deep neural networks for inverse materials design using backpropagation and active learning, Adv. Sci. (2020)
     1902607.
[16] Xiaoxuan Zhang, Krishna Garikipati, Machine learning materials physics: multi-resolution neural networks learn the free energy and nonlinear elastic
     response of evolving microstructures, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2001.01575, 2019.
[17] Michel Grediac, Fabrice Pierron, Stéphane Avril, Evelyne Toussaint, The virtual ﬁelds method for extracting constitutive parameters from full-ﬁeld
     measurements: a review, Strain 42 (4) (2006) 233–253.
[18] Daniel Z. Huang, Kailai Xu, Charbel Farhat, Eric Darve, Predictive modeling with learned constitutive laws from indirect observations, arXiv preprint,
     arXiv:1905.12530, 2019.
[19] Jie Yang, Rui Xu, Heng Hu, Qun Huang, Wei Huang, Structural-genome-driven computing for composite structures, Compos. Struct. 215 (2019) 446–453.
[20] Jamshid Ghaboussi, David A. Pecknold, Mingfu Zhang, Rami M. Haj-Ali, Autoprogressive training of neural network constitutive models, Int. J. Numer.
     Methods Eng. 42 (1) (1998) 105–126.
[21] Julia Ling, Reese Jones, Jeremy Templeton, Machine learning strategies for systems with invariance properties, J. Comput. Phys. 318 (2016) 22–35.
[22] Zeliang Liu, C.T. Wu, M. Koishi, A deep material network for multiscale topology learning and accelerated nonlinear modeling of heterogeneous mate-
     rials, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 345 (2019) 1138–1168.
[23] Zeliang Liu, C.T. Wu, Exploring the 3d architectures of deep material network in data-driven multiscale mechanics, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 127 (2019)
     20–46.
[24] Yousef Heider, Kun Wang, WaiChing Sun, So(3)-invariance of informed-graph-based deep neural network for anisotropic elastoplastic materials, Com-
     put. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 345 (2020) 1138–1168.
[25] Jintai Chung, G.M. Hulbert, A time integration algorithm for structural dynamics with improved numerical dissipation: the generalized-α method, J.
     Appl. Mech. 60 (2) (1993) 371–375.
[26] Zdenek P. Bazant, Ted B. Belytschko, Ta-Peng Chang, et al., Continuum theory for strain-softening, J. Eng. Mech. 110 (12) (1984) 1666–1692.
[27] Rodney Hill, The Mathematical Theory of Plasticity, vol. 11, Oxford University Press, 1998.
[28] Juan C. Simo, Thomas J.R. Hughes, Computational Inelasticity, vol. 7, Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[29] François Nicot, Jean Lerbet, Félix Darve, Second-order work criterion: from material point to boundary value problems, Acta Mech. 228 (7) (2017)
     2483–2498.
[30] Zvi Hashin, Analysis of composite materials—a survey, J. Appl. Mech. 50 (3) (1983) 481–505.
[31] C.T. Sun, R.S. Vaidya, Prediction of composite properties from a representative volume element, Compos. Sci. Technol. 56 (2) (1996) 171–179.
[32] Frédéric Feyel, Jean-Louis Chaboche, Fe2 multiscale approach for modelling the elastoviscoplastic behaviour of long ﬁbre sic/ti composite materials,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 183 (3–4) (2000) 309–330.
[33] T. Kanit, S. Forest, I. Galliet, V. Mounoury, D. Jeulin, Determination of the size of the representative volume element for random composites: statistical
     and numerical approach, Int. J. Solids Struct. 40 (13–14) (2003) 3647–3679.
[34] Zheng Yuan, Jacob Fish, Toward realization of computational homogenization in practice, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 73 (3) (2008) 361–380.
[35] Yves Surrel, Moiré and grid methods: a signal-processing approach, in: Interferometry’94: Photomechanics, vol. 2342, International Society for Optics
     and Photonics, 1994, pp. 118–128.
[36] Stéphane Avril, Marc Bonnet, Anne-Sophie Bretelle, Michel Grédiac, François Hild, Patrick Ienny, Félix Latourte, Didier Lemosse, Stéphane Pagano,
     Emmanuel Pagnacco, et al., Overview of identiﬁcation methods of mechanical parameters based on full-ﬁeld measurements, Exp. Mech. 48 (4) (2008)
     381.
[37] Giuseppe Geymonat, François Hild, Stéphane Pagano, Identiﬁcation of elastic parameters by displacement ﬁeld measurement, C. R. Mecanique 330 (6)
     (2002) 403–408.


                                                                              24
K. Xu, D.Z. Huang and E. Darve                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 110072


[38] Xia-Ting Feng, Chengxiang Yang, Genetic evolution of nonlinear material constitutive models, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 190 (45) (2001)
     5957–5973.
[39] Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, Yoshua Bengio, On the diﬃculty of training recurrent neural networks, in: International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2013, pp. 1310–1318.
[40] René De Borst, Mike A. Crisﬁeld, Joris J.C. Remmers, Clemens V. Verhoosel, Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis of Solids and Structures, John Wiley &
     Sons, 2012.
[41] Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, The Elements of Statistical Learning, 2nd edition, Springer Series in Statistics, 2016, New York.
[42] João Paulo Pascon, Large deformation analysis of plane-stress hyperelastic problems via triangular membrane ﬁnite elements, Int. J. Adv. Struct. Eng.
     11 (3) (2019) 331–350.
[43] R.S. Rivlin, in: F.R. Eirich (Ed.), Rheology: Theory and Applications, Academic Books, London, 1956, p. 531.
[44] P. Kanouté, D.P. Boso, J.L. Chaboche, B.A. Schreﬂer, Multiscale methods for composites: a review, Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 16 (1) (2009) 31–75.
[45] Matthew J. Zahr, Philip Avery, Charbel Farhat, A multilevel projection-based model order reduction framework for nonlinear dynamic multiscale prob-
     lems in structural and solid mechanics, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 112 (8) (2017) 855–881.
[46] Zeliang Liu, M.A. Bessa, Wing Kam Liu, Self-consistent clustering analysis: an eﬃcient multi-scale scheme for inelastic heterogeneous materials, Comput.
     Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 306 (2016) 319–341.
[47] Jiequn Han, Arnulf Jentzen, E. Weinan, Solving high-dimensional partial differential equations using deep learning, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115 (34) (2018)
     8505–8510.
[48] Richard H. Byrd, Peihuang Lu, Jorge Nocedal, Ciyou Zhu, A limited memory algorithm for bound constrained optimization, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 16 (5)
     (1995) 1190–1208.
[49] Jorge J. Moré, David J. Thuente, Line search algorithms with guaranteed suﬃcient decrease, ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 20 (3) (1994) 286–307.
[50] Roi Livni, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, On the computational eﬃciency of training neural networks, in: Advances in Neural Information Process-
     ing Systems, 2014, pp. 855–863.
[51] Kenji Kawaguchi, Jiaoyang Huang, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Effect of depth and width on local minima in deep learning, Neural Comput. 31 (7) (2019)
     1462–1498.
[52] Eric Maire, Philip John Withers, Quantitative x-ray tomography, Int. Mater. Rev. 59 (1) (2014) 1–43.




                                                                              25
