                                                      Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering, 11 (3): 201–225 (2013)




        COMPUTATIONAL HOMOGENIZATION METHOD
        AND REDUCED DATABASE MODEL FOR
        HYPERELASTIC HETEROGENEOUS STRUCTURES

        Julien Yvonnet,1,∗ Eric Monteiro,2 & Qi-Chang He1

        1
         Université Paris-Est, Laboratoire Modélisation et simulation Multi Echelle, 5 Bd Descartes,
        F-77454 Marne-la-Vallée Cedex 2, France
        2
            Université Paris-Est, IFSTTAR, GRETTIA, F-93160, Noisy-le-Grand, France

        ∗
            Address all correspondence to Julien Yvonnet, E-mail: julien.yvonnet@univ-paris-est.fr

        A nonconcurrent multiscale homogenization method is proposed to compute the response of structures made of het-
        erogeneous hyperelastic materials. The method uses a database describing the effective strain energy density function
        (potential) in the macroscopic right Cauchy-Green strain tensor space. Each value of the database is computed numeri-
        cally by means of the finite element method on a representative volume element, the corresponding macroscopic strains
        being prescribed as boundary conditions. An interpolation scheme is then introduced to provide a continuous represen-
        tation of the potential, from which the macroscopic stress and elastic tangent tensors can be derived during macroscopic
        structures calculations. To efficiently compute the interpolations at the macroscopic scale, the full database is reduced
        by a tensor product approximation. Several extensions are provided to handle issues related to finite strains. The ac-
        curacy of the method is tested through different numerical tests involving composites at finite strains with isotropic or
        anisotropic microstructures. Second-order accuracy is achieved during the macroscopic Newton-Raphson iterations.

        KEY WORDS: computational homogenization, hyperelasticity, numerically explicit potentials, structures



1. INTRODUCTION

Biological tissues, reinforced rubbers, or polymers are examples of heterogeneous materials composed of hypere-
lastic phases undergoing large deformations. One major challenge in engineering is the prediction of their effective
properties from the knowledge of the phase behavior and morphology of the microstructure. Compared to the case
of linearly elastic composites, taking into account both material and geometrical nonlinearities induces several major
difficulties. First, the general form of the constitutive law is not known. Second, the superposition principle does not
hold. Consequently, all analytical and computational homogenization techniques proposed for the linear case break
down unless a proper linearization procedure is defined. Third, finite strains might induce instabilities and bifurcations
of solution due to the loss of ellipticity of the tangent elastic tensor.
    To tackle this problem, many authors have extended analytical homogenization approaches in some specific cases.
In a series of works [deBotton (2005); deBotton et al. (2006); deBotton and Shmuel (2009), Aboudi (2008) and He
et al. (2006), among others], estimates and exact solutions for some classes of hyperelastic composites have been
derived. Ponte-Castaneda and Tiberio (2000) introduced a second-order homogenization method to determine the
effective constitutive laws of both porous and reinforced nonlinear composites, followed by several authors such
as Bouchart et al. (2004); Lahellec et al. (2004) and Lopez-Pamies and Ponte-Castaneda (2004). The problem of
structural instability due to finite strains in composites has been studied in a pioneering work of Abeyaratne and
Triantafyllidis (1984) and investigated in several studies (Triantafyllidis et al., 2006; Triantafyllidis and Schnaidt,
1993), Lopez-Pamies and Ponte-Castaneda (2004, 2006) and Michel et al. (2007).



2152–5080/13/$35.00 ⃝
                    c 2013 by Begell House, Inc.                                                                                201
202                                                                                              Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



     As an efficient alternative, numerical multiscale methods are suitable for dealing with the treatment of arbitrary
morphologies and local constitutive laws that cannot be handled by analytical approaches. When dealing with non-
linear composites, two main methodologies can be distinguished. The first is based on techniques sometimes named
in the literature as concurrent or integrated multiscale methods. They generally employ a modeling strategy where
nonlinear problems are solved simultaneously at two scales, e.g., by means of the finite element method (FEM). The
macroscopic computation provides the strain state in all integration points, and boundary conditions are prescribed for
all corresponding representative volume element (RVE) problems. Their solution gives the stress for the next iteration
of the macroscopic FEM calculation. The interested reader can find for more details about the method [called “FE2 ”
in Feyel (1999)] and its recent extensions in Feyel (1999, 2003); Feyel and Chaboche (2000); Ghosh et al. (2001);
Kouznetsova et al. (2004); Monteiro et al. (2008); Smit et al. (1998); Terada and Kikuchi (2001); Yvonnet and He
(2007). The second class of methodologies consists in decoupling computations at both scales, to avoid the drastic
computational costs of nested finite element solvers. The most popular one aims at identifying parameters of a macro-
scopic constitutive law from experimental or numerical tests, given some loading evolutions, see Gendy and Saleeb
(2000) and Ogden et al. (2004). To construct constitutive laws without prior knowledge on the form of the constitutive
equations, Terada and Kikuchi (1995), Takano et al. (1996), Temizer and Wriggers (2007); Temizer and Zohdi (2007),
Tran et al. (2011); Yvonnet et al. (2009), and Clément et al. (2012) have introduced a database obtained from RVE
calculations to describe the effective behavior as a function of the macroscopic load. Finally, a more recent approach
has been suggested in Lamari et al. (2010) to decouple multilevel calculations via a separated representation of the
microscopic variables.
     Temizer and Wriggers (2007) an Temizer and Zohdi (2007) introduced a numerical mapping for defining the
strain-stress relationship of homogenized hyperelastic heterogeneous materials with isotropic/transversally isotropic,
and orthotropic overall behavior. The macroscopic parameters domain is meshed with multidimensional elements to
interpolate the values of the precomputed stresses. A procedure is drawn to construct the material map with respect to
macroscopic stretches and angles. In Yvonnet et al. (2009), we proposed a related technique for nonlinear composites
at small strains. The macroscopic stress-strain relationship is derived from a database containing the values of the
effective strain density function. Interpolation methods in high dimensions are employed to determine the values of
the potential, as well as the stress and tangent elastic tensor components. In the present paper we extend this approach,
called the method of numerically explicit potentials (NEXP), to finite strains. As compared to Temizer and Wriggers
(2007) and Temizer and Zohdi (2007), we directly compute the stress-strain relationship on the basis of the effective
potential. Its values are interpolated in the Cauchy-Green strain space, which simplifies the construction of the material
map and does not restrict the analysis to orthotropic overall materials. To efficiently compute the interpolations at the
macroscopic scale, the full database is reduced by means of a tensor product approximation. A treatment is proposed
to account for nonadmissible regions in the macroscopic strain domain, when the loading induces a divergence of the
computations on the RVE. Furthermore, a procedure is described for strain states falling outside of the domain defined
by the database. We do not consider bifurcations or instabilities at the micro scale in this work.
     In Section 2 we first present the framework for homogenization of hyperelastic heterogeneous materials based
on effective potentials. In Section 3 the NEXP method is described and its different extensions for finite strains are
introduced. We finally test the accuracy of the method in Section 4 through different numerical examples involving
hyperelastic heterogeneous microstructures and structures.


2. HOMOGENIZATION OF NONLINEAR COMPOSITES AT FINITE STRAINS

2.1 Kinematic Preliminaries

We consider a heterogeneous structure defined over an open domain Ω ⊂ RD , whose microstructure is assumed char-
acterized by a representative volume element (RVE), defined over an open domain Ω ⊂ RD , as depicted schematically
in Fig. 1. The boundary of the RVE is denoted by ∂Ω. A material point is identified by its position vector X in the
reference configuration or by its current position x in the deformed configuration. These quantities are related through



                                                                          Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                               203




                                                                 ¶W



                         FIG. 1: (a) Macrostructure and (b) representative volume element.


                                                      x = X + u,                                                    (2.1)

where u is the displacement vector. The deformation gradient tensor F at X is defined as

                                                    ∂x
                                               F=      = 1 + ∇X (u),                                                (2.2)
                                                    ∂X
where 1 is the second-order identity tensor and ∇X (.) is the gradient with respect to the reference configuration.
                                                                                                     ∪N
The material is composed of different hyperelastic phases occupying domains Ω(r) such that Ω = r=1 Ω(r) . The
constitutive behavior of the phases is thus characterized by a strain energy density function, or an elastic potential
Ψ(r) , which depends on the right Cauchy-Green strain tensor C = FT F. Thus the local strain energy density function
of the composite can be written in Ω as

                                                         ∑
                                                         N
                                          Ψ(X, C) =            χ(r) (X)Ψ(r) (C).                                    (2.3)
                                                         r=1


In Eq. (2.3) χ(r) is the characteristic function of phase r which is equal to one if X ∈ Ω(r) and to zero otherwise. The
strain energy density functions Ψ(r) (C) automatically satisfy the material frame invariance. The material impenetra-
bility imposes that the condition Ψ(r) → ∞ as det(C) → 0+ be satisfied. In the Lagrangian description, the local
constitutive law is then given by
                                                           ∂Ψ
                                                     S=2      (X, C),                                               (2.4)
                                                           ∂C
where S denotes the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, and sufficient smoothness is assumed for Ψ with respect to
C. Other useful quantities can be defined:

                                                                          1
                                        J = det(F), P = FS, σ =             PFT ,                                   (2.5)
                                                                          J
where J is the Jacobian, P is the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, and σ is the Cauchy stress tensor. For later use,
the fourth-order elastic tangent tensor is defined by

                                                          ∂ 2 Ψ(X, C)
                                                  L=4                 .                                             (2.6)
                                                             ∂C∂C


Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
204                                                                                                     Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



    We assume that the RVE is associated to a material constituting a structure at a larger scale and that scales are
separated, i.e., the characteristic length scale of the structure and applied loads are much larger than the size of Ω. At
the macroscopic scale, kinematic quantities can be defined as follows:

                                               F = ⟨F⟩ , J = det(F) ̸= ⟨J⟩ ,                                              (2.7)
                                                               1(        )
                                    C = (F)T F ̸= ⟨C⟩ , E =       C − 1 ̸= ⟨E⟩ .                               (2.8)
                                                               2
    In the above expressions, ⟨.⟩ corresponds to the volume average over Ω. The Hill-Mandel lemma [see, e.g., Li and
Wang (2008)] states that if the RVE is subjected to homogeneous or periodic boundary conditions (see Section 2.2),
then
                                                ⟨P : F⟩ = ⟨P⟩ : ⟨F⟩ .                                          (2.9)
A consequence of this lemma is that the macroscopic first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor can be defined according to
                                                                      ∗
                                                                   ∂Ψ (F)
                                                      P = ⟨P⟩ =           ,                                              (2.10)
                                                                     ∂F
           ∗
where Ψ (F) defines the strain density function or elastic potential associated with the homogeneous equivalent
material, determined by

                            ∗                                              ∑
                                                                           N         ⟨         ⟩(r)
                          Ψ (F) =      Inf      ⟨Ψ∗ (X,F)⟩ =       Inf           c(r) Ψ∗(r) (F)     ,                    (2.11)
                                    F∈K∗ (F)                      F∈K∗ (F) r=1


where K∗ is the set of kinematically admissible deformation gradient tensors. In the above, ⟨.⟩ indicates the volume
                                                                                                        (r)

average over Ω(r) and c(r) refers to the volume fraction of phase r in the reference configuration. A discussion on the
                                                                                                                   ∗
validity of extending extremum principles to finite strains can be found in Ogden (1978). It can be shown that Ψ is
                            ∗
objective. Thus, Ψ(C) = Ψ (F). It is worth noting that only F and P can be defined as the volume spatial averages
of their microscopic counterparts. Furthermore, we have the relations
                                               −1                      1    T
                                      S=F           P ̸= ⟨S⟩ , σ =       P F ̸= ⟨σ⟩ .                                    (2.12)
                                                                       J
A similar relation to (2.10) can be stated to relate the effective second Piola-Kirchhoff stress S and right Cauchy-Green
strains C. Using (2.10), we have
                                               ∗             ∗
                                             ∂Ψ (F)   ∂Ψ (F) ∂C kl   ∂Ψ(C) ∂C kl
                                  P ij =            =              =                                                     (2.13)
                                              ∂F ij    ∂C kl ∂F ij    ∂C kl ∂F ij
and
                                ∂C kl    ∂ (           ) ∂F mk              ∂F ml
                                      =       F mk F ml =       F ml + F mk
                                ∂F ij   ∂F ij             ∂F ij             ∂F ij                                        (2.14)
                                      = δmi δkl F ml + F mk δmi δlj = F il δkj + F ik δlj ,
which lead to
                                       −1 ∂ Ψ̃(C) (                        ) ∂ Ψ̃(C)
                   S αj = F αi P ij = F αi              F il δkj + F ik δlj =        (δαl δkj + δαk δlj ) .              (2.15)
                                              ∂C kl                           ∂C kl
      After simplifications and using the symmetry of C we obtain

                                                                 ∂Ψ(C)
                                                        S=2            .                                                 (2.16)
                                                                  ∂C


                                                                              Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                             205



   Then the effective strain-density function Ψ of the composite can be defined as

                                                                        ∑
                                                                        N         ⟨        ⟩(r)
                            Ψ(C) =     inf    ⟨Ψ(X,C)⟩ =         inf          c(r) Ψ(r) (C)     ,               (2.17)
                                     C∈K(C)                     C∈K(C) r=1


where K is the set of kinematically admissible strain tensors for C. In other words, for a given macroscopic strain
state C, the corresponding value of Ψ(C) is found by evaluating the average of local potential functions Ψ(X,C),
where C(X) is an admissible strain field. Using similar arguments, the macroscopic tangent elastic tensor L can be
expressed as
                                                        ∂ 2 Ψ(C)
                                                  L=4         2 .                                           (2.18)
                                                          ∂C

2.2 Micro and Macro Problems
At the microscopic scale the stress must satisfy the local equilibrium condition:

                                                ∇X · (FS) = 0 on Ω,                                             (2.19)

where ∇X · (.) denotes the divergence operator with respect to the reference configuration. Equation (2.19) must be
completed with boundary conditions. Different types of boundary conditions can be considered, such as kinematically
uniform, statically uniform, or periodic boundary conditions. In this work we use the last, expressed in the case of
finite strains by
                                   u(X) = (F − 1)X + ũ(X) = ud (X) on ∂Ω,                                    (2.20)
where ũ(X) is a periodic function over Ω. At the macroscopic scale, the equilibrium equation must be verified:

                                                ∇X · (FS) = 0 on Ω,                                             (2.21)

with boundary conditions

                               u(X) = û(X)      on      ∂Ωu ,         PN̂ = F̂ on ∂ΩF ,                        (2.22)

where u, X, ∂Ωu , ∂ΩF , F̂, and N̂ denote the macroscopic domain, the macroscopic displacements, the macroscopic
coordinates in the reference configuration, the macroscopic Dirichlet boundary, the macroscopic Neumann boundary,
the applied external force, and the outward unit normal vector to the boundary of ∂Ω, respectively [see Fig. 1(a)]. The
related weak forms and linearized equations used for finite element computations are provided in Appendix.

3. THE METHOD OF NUMERICALLY EXPLICIT POTENTIALS FOR HYPERELASTIC
   HETEROGENEOUS MEDIA
The method of numerically explicit potentials (NEXP) was originally proposed by Yvonnet et al. (2009) in the context
of small strains to compute the response of heterogeneous nonlinear composites. In the following, we review the basic
ideas of the procedure and propose some extensions in the case of hyperelastic materials.

3.1 Basic Ideas
The NEXP method aims at constructing the effective behavior of nonlinear materials by means of an overall potential
Ψ(C) which is evaluated and interpolated numerically in the space of macroscopic strains C components as
                                                           ∑
                                                Ψ(C) ≈           Ni (C)Ψi ,                                       (3.1)
                                                            i




Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
206                                                                                                         Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



where Ni are interpolation functions in the strain space. The main steps of the method are summarized as follows.
For this purpose, finite element computations are performed on an RVE for each point of the strain domain, which
corresponds to boundary conditions for the local nonlinear problem. Once computed and stored, the discrete values
of the potential Ψi can be interpolated and derived for obtaining the stress S as

                                                          ∑ ∂Ni (C)
                                               S(C) ≈ 2                 Ψi .                                                            (3.2)
                                                           i
                                                                 ∂C

   Finally, the tangent elastic tensor L, required during the Newton procedure at each integration point of the macro-
scopic mesh to solve numerically the problem defined in Eqs. (2.21) and (2.22), is computed according to

                                                          ∑ ∂ 2 Ni (C)
                                              L(C) ≈ 4                   Ψi .                                                           (3.3)
                                                           i
                                                               ∂C∂C

      The main steps of the method are summarized as follows:

      i. A representative volume element is defined, associated with the microstructure of the heterogeneous material.

   ii. A domain ∆ ⊂ R6 for a 3D problem or ∆ ⊂ R3 for a 2D problem is defined, related to the space of macroscopic
       right Cauchy-Green strain tensors C.

  iii. The domain ∆ is discretized into a finite number of nodes. For each node, the corresponding values of C are
       used to prescribe boundary conditions on the RVE, as detailed in Section 3.2.2. The problem is then solved
       numerically to obtain Ψ(C). This operation is repeated for all the nodes.

  iv. Given the database, a continuous interpolation of the discrete values is realized by an appropriate interpolation
      scheme (see Section 3.2.4). An illustration of this process is given in Fig. 2. During the macroscopic finite
      element computations, the effective stress-strain relationship as well as the tangent matrix can be computed by
      deriving the continuous interpolation, for all macroscopic strains falling within ∆. For points falling outside of
      the strain domain, an extrapolation method is proposed (see Section 3.2.6).



                    1

                   0.9

                   0.8
                                                           Yk
                                                                                                                                  200


                   0.7

                   0.6

              C12 0.5                                                          Y (C )
                   0.4
                                                               Y (C )                                                             100




                   0.3

                   0.2

                   0.1                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                              2
                    0                                                                                                  1.75
                         1           1.5              2                                                          1.5


                                                                                        C12       0
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                          1.25




                                                                                                                 C11
                                     C11
              FIG. 2: Interpolated effective potential Ψ(C) from values Ψk (C) in the (C 11 − C 12 ) plane.



                                                                           Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                               207



3.2 Computational Details
The computational details of the procedure can be found in Yvonnet et al. (2009). For completeness of this paper,
we provide here not only the main equations but also extensions required for treating issues related to finite strains.
One key ingredient is the use of a reduced database model to decrease computational time and to define simple
extrapolation procedures outside of the macroscopic strain domain.

3.2.1 Notations
In this work we employ the following notations, similar to Voigt’s notations but respecting the symmetry between
strain and stress, to express the tensor C components:

                                                                     C4
                       C = C 1 e1 ⊗ e1 + C 2 e2 ⊗ e2 + C 3 e3 ⊗ e3 + √ (e2 ⊗ e3 + e3 ⊗ e2 )
                                                                      2
                                                                                                                    (3.4)
                           C5                          C6
                         + √ (e1 ⊗ e3 + e3 ⊗ e1 ) + √ (e1 ⊗ e2 + e2 ⊗ e1 ).
                             2                          2
Then we have the relations
                                                               √             √             √
               C 1 = C 11 , C 2 = C 22 , C 3 = C 33 , C 4 =     2C 23 , C 5 = 2C 31 , C 6 = 2C 12 .                 (3.5)

The same notations are used for the components S α , (α = 1, 2, ..., 6). In that context,

                       ∂Ψ                     ∂2Ψ
               Sα = 2      , Lαβ = 4γαβ                 = 4γαβ L̂αβ , (no sum with respect to α, β)                 (3.6)
                      ∂C α                  ∂C α ∂C β
                           √
where γαβ take values 1, 1/ 2 or 1/2 [see Yvonnet et al. (2009)].

3.2.2 Boundary Conditions
As the local problem is solved with the purpose of computing the potential Ψ(C), it is necessary to define boundary
conditions on the RVE with respect to C. As Ψ does not depend on rotations R, we can choose among all possible R
                                                  1/2
the unit tensor R = 1, which leads to F = U = C . Then the boundary conditions (2.20) can be reformulated as
                                                    1/2
                                       u(X) = (C          − 1)X + ũ(X) on ∂Ω.                                      (3.7)

3.2.3 Choice of Macroscopic Strain Domain and Discretization
Details regarding discretization of the macroscopic strain domain in the case of a regular distribution of nodes have
been provided in Yvonnet et al. (2009). In this work we define ∆ as ∆ = ∆1 × ∆2 × ... × ∆D , where ∆i are
one-dimensional domains related to the components C i . To define ∆i , extrema must be chosen, supposed to cover
as much as possible all strain states during the macroscopic simulation. This is not a trivial task in the case of large
strains. In the present work, a practical strategy was adopted. We conduct two different macroscopic simulations,
with a homogeneous behavior for the structure. In the first one, the behavior is the one of the matrix, while in the
second case the behavior is the one of the inclusions. These simulations can be run in very short time. Then we
determine a posteriori the range of strain levels in the structure from these computations to determine ∆i . However,
this cannot guarantee that no point of the structure falls outside of the strain domain during the simulation. In Temizer
and Wriggers (2007) and Temizer and Zohdi (2007), the authors proposed an adaptive strategy to handle this issue: if
a point is out of the strain domain, the stress is computed by solving an RVE problem, as in multilevel finite element
methods. Here we propose an alternative technique, based on an extrapolation of the data out of the strain domain,
exploiting the tensor-product structure of the reduced database model. Details and discussion on this approach are
provided in Section 3.2.6.



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
208                                                                                                            Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



    We choose a rectangular grid as described in Yvonnet et al. (2009), i.e., each domain ∆i is discretized into pi
nodes. Then the value of Ψ at the node xk with indices i1 , i2 , ..., iD is denoted by Ψi1 i2 ...iD = Ψk . If the RVE
possesses symmetries, then many computations can be avoided as only a part of the data must actually be computed.
For example, let us consider a 2D RVE with square symmetry (D4 symmetry group). Then we have

                    Ψ(C 1 , C 2 , C 6 ) = Ψ(C 2 , C 1 , C 6 ),         Ψ(C 1 , C 2 , C 6 ) = Ψ(C 1 , C 2 , −C 6 ).               (3.8)

It is worth noting that each problem required to compute Ψk is independent. Then all the computations can be made
on parallel processors to reduce drastically the computational time related to this operation. Several strategies can also
be used to save computational time. For example, as each nonlinear equilibrium problem requires several intermediate
loads from the previous point, we choose as an initial guess for the Newton-Raphson algorithm the solution from the
previous node in the strain space. When two consequent nodes lead to very different strains, we prescribe intermediate
computations through a maximum ∆C.

3.2.4 Reduced Database Model and Interpolation Schemes
Contrary to Temizer and Wriggers (2007) and Temizer and Zohdi (2007), where the mapping is constructed by storing
the stress or tangent elastic tensors components values, we use the potential as a database. Then we require the
interpolation to be twice continuously differentiable with respect to C to obtain a C 0 representation of L. In Yvonnet
et al. (2009) we proposed different interpolation schemes for high-dimensional grids, including multidimensional
spline and separated variables techniques. In the present work we chose the last, which replaces the full database
by a reduced model as a tensor product approximation of 1D functions. The advantage is to be less time consuming
regarding computations of the spline coefficients and as it involves only 1D interpolations to evaluate the stress and
tangent matrices.
    In this approach, the database is stored as a hypermatrix W. The reduced model approximation is given as a
tensorial representation [parallel factor decomposition, Kiers (2000)]:

                                                     ∑
                                                     R
                                               W≈           ϕr1 ⊗ ϕr2 ⊗ ... ⊗ ϕrD ,                                              (3.9)
                                                     r=1


where ϕri (i = 1, ..., 6) are real-valued vectors related to the macroscopic strain tensor components C i and R is an
integer. In index notation Eq. (3.9) reads

                                                          ∑
                                                          R
                                        W̄i1 i2 ...i6 ≈         {ϕr1 }i1 {ϕr2 }i2 ... {ϕr6 }i6 ,                                (3.10)
                                                          r=1
       { }
where ϕrj k denotes the kth entry of vector ϕrj . The vectors ϕrj involved in (3.9) are found by solving the following
least-squares problem for a given R:
                                                                         2
                                      ∑
                                      R
                       inf     W̄ −         ϕr1 ⊗ ϕr2 ⊗ ... ⊗ ϕr6            ,   r = 1, ..., R,    j = 1, ..., 6,               (3.11)
                       ϕrj            r=1


where ∥.∥ is the Frobenius norm. To achieve a desired accuracy, R can be increased until

                                                    ∑
                                                    R
                                             W̄ −         ϕr1 ⊗ ϕr2 ⊗ ... ⊗ ϕr6 < δ,                                            (3.12)
                                                    r=1

where δ is a tolerance parameter. As the problem (3.11) is nonlinear with respect to the unknown vectors ϕrj , an
iterative procedure is required to solve it. An efficient algorithm is the alternated least squares algorithm of Carol and



                                                                                     Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                                          209



Chang (1970), Harshman (1970), and Zhang and Golub (2001). The decomposition (3.9) is well-known to the commu-
nity of psychometrics, and efficient routines and software have been developed. We used the Matlab Tensor Toolbox
[Mathworks (2010), parafac.m function] for this task. From (3.9), the continuous interpolation can be obtained as

                                                   ∗                            ∑
                                                                                R
                      Ψ(C 1 , C 2 , ..., C 6 ) ≈ Ψ (C 1 , C 2 , ..., C 6 ) =          ϕ̃r1 (C 1 )ϕ̃r2 (C 2 )...ϕ̃r6 (C 6 ),   (3.13)
                                                                                r=1


where ϕ̃rj (εj ) are the interpolated values of ϕrj :

                                                                ∑
                                                                n
                                                                               { }
                                                ϕ̃rj (C j ) =         Nk (C j ) ϕrj k .                                       (3.14)
                                                                k=1

In Eq. (3.14), Nk is the one-dimensional C 2 interpolation function associated with node k, n {denotes
                                                                                                   } the number of
nodes supporting the shape functions Nk (C j ) whose values at C j are different from zero, and ϕrj k are the discrete
values of ϕrj . The second Piola-Kirchhoff stress can be approximated by
                                                                                                           
                                                               ∑R    ∏                  ∂ ϕ̃r (C )
                                 ∗
                               S i (C 1 , C 2 , ..., C 6 ) = 2             ϕ̃rk (C k )       i   i 
                                                                                                      .                       (3.15)
                                                                                        ∂C i
                                                               r=1     k̸=i

                                       ∗
    Then the approximated value L of L is evaluated by
                                                                                        
                                                 ∑
                                                 R   ∏             ∂ ϕ̃r (C ) ∂ ϕ̃r (C )
                  ∗
                 Lij (C 1 , C 2 , ..., C 6 ) = 4       ϕ̃rk (C k )      i   i      j   j
                                                                                            if i ̸= j,                       (3.16)
                                                                   ∂C i          ∂C j
                                                r=1        k̸=i,j

                                                                                                   
                                                         ∑R    ∏                  ∂ 2 ϕ̃r (C )
                          ∗
                         Lij (C 1 , C 2 , ..., C 6 ) = 4             ϕ̃rk (C k )         i    i 
                                                                                                              if i = j,       (3.17)
                                                                                  ∂C 2
                                                         r=1     k̸=i                        i

with
                      ∂ ϕ̃ri (C i ) ∑ ∂Nk (C i )                                             ∑
                                      n                                                      n
                                                                       ∂ 2 ϕ̃ri (C i )         ∂ 2 Nk (C i )
                                   =             {ϕri }k ,                      2        =                2       {ϕri }k .   (3.18)
                         ∂C i        k=1
                                         ∂C i                              ∂C i              k=1     ∂C i
    In this work, the functions Ni are chosen to be one-dimensional C 2 cubic spline functions, even though other C 2
interpolation schemes can be considered. For a strain domain of high dimension, this approach only requires finding
the coefficients of one-dimensional spline functions, and thus only a small system of equations has to be solved, which
saves computational time and memory.

3.2.5 Extension of Missing Data in Nonadmissible Regions of the Strain Domain
In the case of large strains, specific issues can arise. First, some points in the strain domain might lead to diver-
gence of the computations, due to severe local strains in the microstructure, or corresponding to physical meaningless
configurations. These points can be associated to high or infinite potential energy. As a consequence, defining an inter-
polation procedure in a grid with sharp gradients is delicate, especially for a polynomial interpolation scheme such as
C 2 splines: severe oscillations of the interpolated function can occur in the regions of available data which can have a
catastrophic effect on the derivatives (stress and tangent matrix). To circumvent this difficulty, a strategy is proposed.
We extend artificially the data in the missing regions to maintain a smooth representation of the interpolation even
near points with high levels of energy. During the construction of the database, if a point xk leads to divergence of
the computations, we stop the calculations and fill the entry of the hypermatrix with a special flag to identify it as



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
210                                                                                               Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



a missing value. The algorithm for extending the database in regions with missing data is described as follows and
illustrated in 2D for the sake of simplicity.
    Let a domain ω in RD be composed of a subdomain A where a scalar field u : RD → R is defined and a
subdomain A where u is not known, such that ω = A ∪ A [see Fig. 3(a)]. Both domains are separated by an interface
∂A = A ∩ A. The problem consists in finding v(x) in A, knowing u(x) in A. A possible choice is to compute the field
in A by requiring the extended field to satisfy some continuity conditions. For example, choosing v(x) ∈ H 2 (ω), we
seek for v(x) such that
                                                   ∆v(x) = 0 in A,                                             (3.19)
                                                 ∆v(x) = ∆u(x) on ∂A.                                               (3.20)
Equations (3.19)–(3.20) can be easily solved numerically, e.g., by a finite difference method on the basis of the grid.
Let us define the set containing the indices of the nodes whose data are known by V. In Fig. 3(b), nodes are denoted
by black circles. The set of indices corresponding to missing values is denoted by V. For later use, we denote the set
of nodes corresponding to the interface between known and unknown interface values, i.e., nodes in V that have at
least one neighbor node in V by V∂A , and V Γ the set of nodes on the boundary of the square domain. The algorithm
is specified as follows:
      i. For all nodes i ∈ V and i ∈
                                   / V Γ : express the equation corresponding to the Laplacian (3.19) using the finite
         differences scheme:
                                          ui+1,j − 2ui,j + ui−1,j   ui,j+1 − 2ui,j + ui,j−1
                              ∆u(xi ) ≈                2          +                         = 0.                    (3.21)
                                                   ∆x1                       ∆x22

   ii. For all nodes i ∈ V and i ∈ VΓ : express the equation related to the Laplacian only in the tangential direction to
       the boundary. For example, considering point B in Fig. 3, we have
                                                          ui,j+1 − 2ui,j + ui,j−1
                                              ∆u(xB ) ≈                           = 0.                              (3.22)
                                                                   ∆x22
        For corner nodes i ∈ V (point C in Fig. 3), no system of equations is expressed.
  iii. Form the discrete system Au = b, where A contains the coefficients related to unknown values ui , i ∈ V,
       while b contains the coefficients related to the known values (neighbor nodes with values values uk , k ∈ V∂A
       (see Fig. 3).


                                                                               Dx1
                                                               C

                                 A                             B
                                       ¶A                                                     Dx2
                         GA                                     j
                                          A


                                                                              i
                                      (a)                                    Missing data
                                                                    (b)
                                                                             neighbor nodes
                                                                             Available data

                FIG. 3: (a) Extension of the data in A to the domain A; (b) corresponding discrete grid.



                                                                           Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                                                 211




        2000                                                             2000

        1500                                                             1500

        1000                                                             1000




                                                                     Ψ
    Ψ




        500                                                              500

           0                                                                0
         0.5                                                              0.5
                                                                 1                                                                 1
               1                                                                1
                                                           0.5                                                              0.5
                   1.5                                                              1.5
                                                       0                                                                0
                             2              -0.5                                              2              -0.5
                                 2.5   -1          C                                              2.5   -1          C
                         C                         6
                                                                                          C                         6
                         2                                                                2

                                  (a)                                                             (b)

FIG. 4: Extended values of the potential in nonadmissible strain domain regions using the procedure described in
Section 3.2.5. The red values indicate known data and the gray values are the extended data. The figures (a) and (b)
correspond to the values of Ψ(C) for fixed values C 1 = 0.75 and C 1 = 0.9, respectively.


  iv. Solve the system for the unknown values ui , i ∈ V. Note that the obtained system of equations is overdetermined
      (rectangular system). A least-squares method is used to solve it.

    Illustrations of extended values corresponding to the potential in example 4.3 are presented in Fig. 4. Even though
this treatment is needed to apply the interpolation scheme (3.13) in regions of admissible strains, the points related to
nonadmissible strain states theoretically correspond to infinite value of the effective potential energy. Then in some
extreme cases, during macroscopic calculations the balanced macroscopic strain field might have values which are
not admissible, as these strain states would theoretically lead to infinite values of the energy. Even if in practice we
have noticed a good agreement between the reference solutions (FE2 simulations, see Sections 4.3 and 4.4) and the
solution involving the above procedure, this point will deserve further development to introduce the effects of high
energy values in the nonadmissible strain nodes of the database.


3.2.6 Extrapolation of the Numerical Potential outside the Domain of Definition

As stated above, the potential and thus the stress-strain relationship are only available inside ∆. During the macro-
scopic iterations to solve the nonlinear problem, however, strains related to iterations might fall outside ∆ and then
the algorithm proposed to compute S and L breaks down. To treat this issue, we propose here an extrapolation of the
data outside ∆ to increase the robustness of the technique and to alleviate the restriction that all points during the
computation must strictly remain within ∆.
      We use the multilinear character of the reduced basis-interpolation scheme (3.13) to extrapolate the data via a
Taylor expansion. As opposed to the algorithm proposed in the former section, where data are missing inside the
domain ∆, here we construct an analytical expansion outside ∆. To illustrate the idea, we assume for the sake of
simplicity that only one variable C i lies outside ∆i . The following discussion can be extended to the case where
several macroscopic strains C i lie simultaneously outside ∆.
                                                                                                                        ∗
      Let us define ϕ̂ri (C i ) the extrapolated value of a function ϕri (C i ) in (3.13) from an extremal value ϕri (C i ) in ∆i ,
i.e.,
                                                                       ∗                           ∗
                     r           r    ∗             r    ∗     ∂ϕri (C i )              ∂ N ϕri (C i )    D
                   ϕ̂i (C i ) = ϕi (C i + ∆C i ) = ϕi (C i ) +             ∆C i + ... +         N
                                                                                                       ∆C i ,                     (3.23)
                                                                 ∂C i                      ∂C i


Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
212                                                                                                                    Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



where                        {     ∗
                                  C i = M in(C i , Ci ∈ ∆i ) if C i < M in(C i , Ci ∈ ∆i )
                                    ∗                                                                                                   (3.24)
                                  C i = M ax(C i , Ci ∈ ∆i ) if C i > M ax(C i , Ci ∈ ∆i ).
In the first case ∆C i in (3.24) is positive, while in the second case it takes a negative value. In the following, use will
be made of the result:
     If Ψ(C 1 , C 2 , ..., C N ) is given in the separated variables form (3.13) then we have
       (                   ∗
                                              )      [                                                     ]
    Ψ̂ C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i + ∆C 1 , ..., C D = Ψ ϕr1 (C 1 ), ϕr2 (C 2 ), ..., ϕ̂ri (C i ), ..., ϕrD (C D ) r = 1, 2, ..., M. (3.25)

In other words, extrapolating the multidimensional function Ψ in the form (3.13) just requires individually extrapolat-
ing the one-dimensional functions and substituting them in the initial scheme. This renders the algorithm very simple,
as only 1D derivatives need to be evaluated. This property yields from the multilinear character of the functional
(3.13).
    Indeed, we have
                     (                                          )        (               ∗
                                                                                                       )
                  Ψ̂ C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i + ∆C 1 , ..., C D ≃ Ψ C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i , ..., C D
                       ∂ψ (                      ∗
                                                             )             1 ∂2ψ (                    ∗
                                                                                                                  )   2
                   +         C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i , ..., C D ∆C i +             2  C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i , ..., C D ∆C i
                      ∂C i                                                 2 ∂C                                         (3.26)
                                                                                i
                            1 ∂Dψ        (                    ∗
                                                                          )     D
                   + ... +                 C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i , ..., C D ∆C i
                           D! ∂C D
                                       i

                                                                              ∗
                                   ∑
                                   R
                                             ∗ ∏ r                ∑R
                                                                      ∂ϕri (C i ) ∏ r
                                        r
                                 =     ϕi (C i )      ϕj (C j ) +                  ϕj (C j )∆C i
                                   r=1           j̸=i             r=1
                                                                        ∂C i j̸=i
                                                        ∗
                                                                                                                                        (3.27)
                                           ∑
                                           R
                                             1 ∂ D ϕr (C ) ∏                            D
                                                        i       i
                                 + ... +                    D
                                                                           ϕrj (C j )∆C i .
                                           r=1
                                               D!    ∂C i           j̸=i

Now let us express (3.25). We have

                                                                                 ∑
                                                                                 R                 ∏
                               Ψ̂(C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i + ∆C i , ..., C D ) =            ϕ̂(C i )          ϕj (C j ).                    (3.28)
                                                                                  r=1              j̸=i

Introducing (3.23) in (3.28) we obtain

                  Ψ̂(C 1 , C 2 , ..., C i + ∆C i , ..., C D )
                                           (                                                           )
                     ∑R ∏                                          ∗                          ∗         
                                                      ∗
                                                               r
                                                             ∂ϕi (C i )                 D r
                                                                                     1 ∂ ϕi (C i )    D                                 (3.29)
                  ≈                ϕj (C j ) ϕri (C i ) +               ∆C i + ... +               ∆C i    ,
                                                              ∂C i                  D! ∂C  D            
                     r=1    j̸=i                                                            i


which is equal to (3.27).
                                                                        ∗                        ∗      N
    Different choices can be made to evaluate the derivatives ∂ϕri (C i )/∂C i , ..., ∂ N ϕri (C i )/∂C i in (3.23). In the
examples we have used a finite differences scheme. Extrapolation up to second-order has been implemented.
    It should be emphasized here that precautions have to be taken with this procedure. By nature, the Taylor expansion
is accurate in the vicinity of the strain domain boundary but can lead to large errors if points are too far away from it,
depending on the smoothness of the potential. For extreme strain states not included in the domain ∆, one alternative
but much more costly approach is to carry out a full computation on the RVE following Temizer and Wriggers (2007)
and Temizer and Zohdi (2007). However this technique is not adopted in the present work.



                                                                                         Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                             213



4. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES
4.1 Accuracy and Convergence of NEXP Approximation
The purpose of this first example is to demonstrate the accuracy and convergence of the macroscopic stress and elastic
tensor approximations with respect to the number of evaluation points in the macroscopic strain space. We assume a
microstructure characterized by the RVE presented in Fig. 5. The microstructure is periodic with cylindrical inclusions
and volume fraction f = π/16 ≃ 0.1963.
    Within each phase, a compressible Neo-Hookean model described by the following potential function is consid-
ered:
                                          1            2               1
                               Ψ(C) = λ {log(J)} − µ log(J) + µ [T r(C) − 3]                                      (4.1)
                                          2                            2
where λ = Eν/[(1 + ν)(1 − 2ν)] and µ = E/[2(1 + ν)]. Using (2.4) the stress is given by

                                        S(C) = λ log(J)C−1 + µ(I − C−1 ).                                         (4.2)

The parameters of the model for the different phases are taken as E m = 1000 MPa, νm = 0.4, E i = 10,000 MPa, and
νf = 0.3, the indices m and i referring to the matrix and inclusion, respectively. The macroscopic strain domain was
chosen as ∆ = ∆1 × ∆2 × ∆6 = {0.8; 2} × {0.8; 2} × {−0.4; 0.4}. We take into account the symmetry of the RVE
of Fig. 5 (D4 symmetry) to reduce the computations, using (3.8).
     In this example, the same number of points p along each dimension is taken. The discrete potential is computed for
different refined grids comprising p = 5, p = 11, and p = 21. The separated decomposition presented in Section 3.2.4
is applied to reduce the database and to obtain a faster interpolation scheme. In all examples, the tolerance parameter
in Eq. (3.12) is chosen as δ = 10−3 . In the present example, for p = 5, p = 11, and p = 21, we obtain R = 5, R = 5,
and R = 6 sets of basis vectors, respectively. It is worth noting that the number of basis vectors is here not much
dependent on the number of nodes in the database.                               {                            }
     A macroscopic strain is prescribed on the RVE, evolving linearly from C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0 (point A
               {                             }
in Fig. 6) to C 1 = 2, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0.4 (point B in Fig. 6). The NEXP solution is compared with a direct FEM
calculation. As in the FEM case where there is no practical way to evaluate the components of the macroscopic elastic
tangent matrix, perturbations around the load point are prescribed to obtain the components by finite differences
following Feyel (1999). In Figs. 6, 7, and 8 we compare the effective potential, the effective stress components
S ij , and the effective tangent elastic tensor Lijkl for both NEXP and FEM. We can note that the NEXP solution is
convergent with respect to the number of discretization points p in the macroscopic strain space. We also note the good
accuracy of the approximations, even for coarse discretizations. Surprisingly, the elastic tensor components are well
approximated, even though second-order derivatives of the approximated potential have been carried out. This is very
important for the macroscopic computations to ensure stability and second-order convergence in the Newton-Raphson
computations.




                FIG. 5: Representative volume element related to the microstructure of example 4.1.



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
214                                                                                                                   Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



                                          200

                                          180                 NEXP, p = 5                                     B
                                                              NEXP, p = 11
                                          160                 NEXP, p = 21
                                                              Exact (FEM)
                                          140




                               Y (C )
                                          120

                                          100

                                           80
                                                          A                B
                                           60

                                           40
                                                  A
                                           20

                                            0
                                            0.8       1              1.2           1.4   1.6        1.8           2


                                                                                   C11
                                                                {                          }
FIG. 6: Effective potential for a load evolving linearly from C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0 (point A) linearly to
{                           }
 C 1 = 2, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0.4 (point B), uniaxial traction combined with shear; comparison between NEXP and exact
(FEM) solutions.

                                           600

                                                               S11
                                           400                                                                B

                                           200                                                  S22
                               Sij (C )




                                             0



                                          -200
                                                                                                 S12
                                                                                               NEXP, p = 5
                                          -400                                                 NEXP, p = 11
                                                                               B               NEXP, p = 21
                                                  A           A
                                                                                               Exact (FEM)
                                          -600
                                              0.8     1              1.2           1.4   1.6        1.8           2


                                                                                   C11
                                                               {                           }
FIG. 7: Effective stress for a load evolving linearly from C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0 (point A) linearly to
{                           }
 C 1 = 2, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0.4 (point B), uniaxial traction combined with shear; comparison between NEXP and exact
(FEM) solutions.


                                                                                    {                           }
    In this second test, the macroscopic load evolves linearly from the strain state C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0 (point
                      {                          }
A) to the strain state C 1 = 2, C 2 = 2, C 6 = 0 (point B). Results are provided in Figs. 9–11. Very good agreement
is here again noted between FEM and NEXP solutions.

4.2 Comparison of NEXP Method and Identified Macroscopic Models
A material is assumed to be characterized by the microstructure illustrated in Fig. 12. The behavior of the matrix is the
same as in the previous example, with the following parameters: E m = 1000 MPa, νm = 0.48. Choosing a Poisson ratio



                                                                                           Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                                    215



                                          6000

                                                   A                                                 NEXP, p = 5
                                                                                                     NEXP, p = 11
                                          5000
                                                           L1111           A              B
                                                                                                     NEXP, p = 21
                                                                                                     Exact (FEM)
                                          4000

                                                                                   L2222

                             Lijkl (C )
                                          3000
                                                                                                             L1122
                                          2000


                                          1000
                                                           L1212                                                    B

                                             0

                                                   L1112                                                     L2212
                                      -1000
                                           0.8             1             1.2        1.4        1.6     1.8            2


                                                                                    C11
                                                                                     {                            }
FIG. 8: Effective tangent elastic tensor components for a load evolving linearly from C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0
                     {                           }
(point A) linearly to C 1 = 2, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0.4 (point B), uniaxial traction combined with shear; comparison
between NEXP and exact (FEM) solutions.

                                           600

                                                                   NEXP, p = 5                                B
                                           500                     NEXP, p = 11
                                                                   NEXP, p = 21
                                                                   Exact (FEM)
                                           400
                                 Y (C )




                                           300

                                                               A               B
                                           200



                                           100
                                                   A

                                             0
                                             0.8           1             1.2        1.4       1.6    1.8          2


                                                                                    C11
                                                                {                          }
FIG. 9: Effective potential for a load evolving linearly from C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0 (point A) linearly to
{                           }
 C 1 = 2, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0.4 (point B), uniaxial traction combined with shear; comparison between NEXP and exact
(FEM) solutions.


close to 0.5, we model a quasi-incompressible material for the matrix. The porosity is equal to f = π/16 ≃ 0.1963.
As the material is porous, the homogenized material is compressible, assuming that the compressive loads remain
such that the pores are not totally closed. We first construct the database by applying the NEXP methodology. The
macroscopic strain domain was chosen as ∆ = ∆1 × ∆2 × ∆6 = {0.8; 2} × {0.8; 2} × {−0.4; 0.4}. As in the previous
example, symmetries were taken into account to reduce the computations. The numerical potential was computed for
a grid with p = 11. We note that in this example, some discrete values of the potential could not be computed as the
solution diverged for these particular loads. We then used the extension method described in Section 3.2.5 to treat this
issue. Then the separated decomposition was applied to the database, which led to R = 12 sets of basis vectors.



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
216                                                                                                                       Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



                                            1000
                                                                                                                  B
                                             800

                                             600           S11 S22
                                             400
                                                                                         S12


                               Sij (C )
                                             200

                                               0

                                          -200
                                                                                                   NEXP, p = 5
                                          -400                                                     NEXP, p = 11
                                                                                                   NEXP, p = 21
                                          -600                       A            B                Exact (FEM)
                                                       A
                                          -800
                                              0.8             1          1.2       1.4     1.6         1.8            2


                                                                                  C11
                                                               {                           }
FIG. 10: Effective stress for a load evolving linearly from C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0 (point A) linearly to
{                           }
 C 1 = 2, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0.4 (point B), uniaxial traction combined with shear; comparison between NEXP and exact
(FEM) solutions.

                                             7000


                                             6000                                                  NEXP, p = 5
                                                                                                   NEXP, p = 11
                                                                                                   NEXP, p = 21
                                             5000
                                                                   L1111 L2222                     Exact (FEM)
                               Lijkl (C )




                                             4000


                                             3000                    L1122
                                                                               L1212       A                 B
                                             2000


                                             1000


                                                   0
                                                                    L1112 L2212
                                            -1000
                                                 0.8           1         1.2       1.4     1.6         1.8            2


                                                                                   C11
                                                                                      {                            }
FIG. 11: Effective tangent elastic tensor components for a load evolving linearly from C 1 = 0.8, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0
                      {                          }
(point A) linearly to C 1 = 2, C 2 = 1, C 6 = 0.4 (point B), uniaxial traction combined with shear; comparison
between NEXP and exact (FEM) solutions.


    For comparison, other solutions are constructed by means of usual analytical hyperelastic models, whose parame-
ters are identified on the basis of a uniaxial stress-strain curve obtained numerically by means of the same RVE with a
direct FEM calculation. As the macroscopic material is in this case compressible, all these models are compressible.
They are summarized in Table 1. The uniaxial compression (C 11 < 1)/stretching (C 11 > 1) test employed for the
identification of the parameters is shown in Fig. 13. A load is prescribed on the RVE such that C 11 increases linearly
from 0.8 to 2, with C 22 = 1 and C 12 = 0. The numerical solution provided by FEM is referred to in Fig. 13 by solid
lines. The numerical values of the identified parameters are indicated in Table 1.
    We can note from Fig. 13 that even in this simple case, most models cannot reproduce accurately the behavior,
especially in the compression regime. This is due to the highly nonlinear geometric deformations, which create ef-



                                                                                                 Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                            217




                   FIG. 12: Representative volume element of the porous material in example 4.2.

         TABLE 1: Hyperelastic compressible models and identified parameters for the microstructure of
         example 4.2.
          Model                      Constitutive relation                                Identified parameters
          St Venant-Kirchhoff        S = λT r(E) + 2µE                                    λ = 1.24×102 MPa
                                                                                          µ = 2.48×102 MPa
          Mooney-Rivlin I            S = 2(c1 + 2c2 I1 )1 − 2c2 C                         c = 0 MPa
                                     + [2cJ(J − 1) − d] C−1                               c1 = 33.1 MPa
                                     d = 2(c1 + 2c2 )                                     c2 = 1.16 × 102 MPa
          Neo Hookean                S = 2c1 1 + [2cJ(J − 1) − 2c1 ] C−1                  c = 1.97×102 MPa
                                                                                          c1 = 1.55×102 MPa
          Mooney-Rivlin II           S = [λ ln(J) − µ] C−1 + µ1                           λ = 6.19×102 MPa
                                                                                          µ = 2.92×102 MPa
                                            [                                         ]
                                                             −1          Jm
          Gent                       S = µ J(dJ − d − 1)C          +              1       µ = 2.89×102 MPa
                                                                     J m − I1 + 3
                                           2 (1 + ν)  1  2
                                     d=              + −                                  ν = 0.272
                                           3 (1 − 2ν) 3 Jm
                                                                                          Jm = 9.04×102



                                                    S11            S22
                                Sij (C )




                                                    S12




                                                             C11
FIG. 13: Response of the RVE in a compression/stretching test. Reference solution (FEM) and comparisons between
the different macroscopic model and NEXP solution.



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
218                                                                                              Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



fects not captured by the models. In contrary, the NEXP model accurately reproduces all stress components, even in
compression.
    Now using the fitted coefficients, we compute the response of the material for a different load and compare it with
a full FEM computation. In this second test, a biaxial stretching/compression test was carried out, taking C 11 and C 22
evolving linearly from 0.8 to 2 while C 12 = 0. Results are presented in Fig. 14.
    We can notice that even in traction, most models fail to reproduce the biaxial response, while the NEXP model
gives very good accuracy. In a last test, we prescribe the following load evolution: C 11 is fixed to 0.8, enforcing a
compression along one axis. The strain C 22 is kept equal to 1, while the shear strain C 12 varies linearly from 0 to 0.4.
Results are presented in Fig. 15.




                                                  S11 S22
                               Sij (C )




                                                 S12




                                                             C11
FIG. 14: Response of the RVE in a shear test. Reference solution (FEM) and comparisons between the different
macroscopic model.



                                           S12
                                Sij (C )




                                           S11   S22




                                                              C12
FIG. 15: Response of the RVE in a biaxial compression/stretching test. Reference solution (FEM) and comparisons
between the different macroscopic model.



                                                                          Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                            219



     For this load we remark that none of the models is able to reproduce correctly the stress, except the NEXP model.
It is worth noting that with more reference curves, it is possible to increase the accuracy of the empirical models.
However, their choice is a delicate task and there is no guarantee that the model can reproduce the true behavior for
any load.

4.3 A Two Scales Example: Structure Made of a Heterogeneous Material with Anisotropic
    Microstructure
In this example a structure made of a heterogeneous hyperelastic material is considered. The geometry and load
description are provided in Fig. 16(a). On the side (x = L), the displacements are prescribed along e1 but are zero
along e2 . The dimensions of the square plate are L × L = 0.01 × 0.01 m. The microstructure is periodic whose RVE
is described in Fig. 17.
    Each phase is taken to be described by the compressible Neo-Hookean behavior (4.2). The material coefficients
of the phases are taken as E m = 1000 MPa, νm = 0.4, E i = 10,000 MPa, νi = 0.3. We choose a strain domain
∆ = ∆1 × ∆2 × ∆6 with ∆1 = {0.6; 2.1}, ∆2 = {0.6; 2.1}, and ∆6 = {−1.2; 1.2}. During the construction of

                                    L




                        0



FIG. 16: (a) Geometry and boundary conditions for the two-scale example with anisotropic microstructure. (b) Ex-
ample of finite element mesh associated with the macrostructure.

                                           l




                                                           0.2 l
                       l




                                         0.8 l
                                          (a)                                  (b)
FIG. 17: Representative volume related to the microstructure of the two-scale example 4.3 with anisotropic mi-
crostructure: (a) geometry and (b) mesh.



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
220                                                                                                       Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



the database some discrete values of the potential could not be computed as the solution diverged for these particular
loads. We then used the extension method described in Section 3.2.5 to fix this issue. To test the accuracy of the
method, two databases with different discretization were constructed, with p = 11 and p = 21 points along each axis
of the strain domain. The separated variables representation of the associated databases lead to R = 34 and R = 53
in that case. We can notice here that the number of basis vectors is much higher than in previous examples. This can
be explained by sharper variations of the potential with respect to strains.
    To test the convergence of the solution with respect to the macroscopic mesh size, three meshes with different
numbers of elements N e are employed: N e = 328 (coarse mesh), N e = 1312 (average mesh), and N e = 5248 (fine
mesh). An example involving N e = 1312 elements is shown in Fig. 16(b).
    First, we analyze the accuracy of the method. To construct a reference solution, a multilevel finite element method
(FE2 ) code for hyperelasticity has been implemented for the purpose of this study. For further details about the FE2
method, see, e.g., Feyel (1999, 2003) and Feyel and Chaboche (2000). For both approaches, we compute the response
of the structure for a uniaxial stretching along e1 for a macroscopic strain ∆u/H. The macroscopic resultant force is
computed on the boundary where the displacements are prescribed according to
                                                          ∫
                                                    F=        PNdΓ,                                                (4.3)
                                                                ΓF

where ΓF denotes the boundary related to x = L. The x component of F for the macroscopic structure when stretched
along the e1 axis is plotted in Fig. 18. We can notice the good agreement between the reference solution and the
different solutions obtained by the NEXP method for different mesh refinements and values of p. We can also note that
a small number of discretization points p of the strain domain is sufficient to provide an accurate solution. During the
simulation, many points of the structure fell outside of the strain domain. The extrapolation procedure of Section 3.2.6
is then utilized.
     In Fig. 19 we plot the convergence of the macroscopic Newton algorithm during a typical iteration. Second-order
convergence is clearly observed.

                         20
                                         Matrix
                         18              Inclusion
                                         NEXP, Coarse mesh, p=11
                         16              NEXP, Average mesh, p=11
                                         NEXP, Coarse mesh, p=21
                         14              NEXP, average mesh, p=21
                                         NEXP, fine mesh, p=11
                         12              NEXP, fine mesh, p=21
                                           2
                                         FE , Average mesh
                    Fx




                         10


                          8


                          6


                          4


                          2


                          0
                              0   0.02     0.04    0.06      0.08    0.1   0.12     0.14   0.16    0.18    0.2
                                                          Macroscopic Strain

                                    FIG. 18: Response of the macroscopic structure.



                                                                                  Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                              221



                                 0
                                10

                                 −2
                                10

                                 −4
                                10

                                 −6
                                10
                        Error


                                 −8
                                10

                                 −10
                                10

                                 −12
                                10

                                 −14
                                10
                                       1       1.5         2   2.5    3        3.5   4   4.5     5   5.5   6
                                                               Macroscopic Newton iteration

                                 FIG. 19: Convergence of the macroscopic Newton algorithm.


4.4 A Two-Scales Example: Structure Made of a Heterogeneous Material with Porous Structure
A heterogeneous porous structure is described in Fig. 20. It corresponds to the sample used in a typical biaxial
traction test, often employed to identify constitutive models of elastomers Chevalier and Marco (2002). The loading
is described in Fig. 20(a): displacements are prescribed on each flat part of the sample, corresponding to x = L and
y = L, the same in directions e1 and e2 . The dimensions of the samples are L = 0.01 m and R = 0.006 m (see Fig. 20).
The RVE related to the microstructure is the porous cell described in Fig. 12. The behavior of the matrix is the same
as in Eq. (4.2). Its material parameters are E m = 1000 MPa, νm = 0.4. The discrete potential is constructed in a strain
domain ∆ = ∆1 × ∆2 × ∆6 with ∆1 = {0.6; 2.1}, ∆2 = {0.6; 2.1}, and ∆6 = {−1.2; 1.2}. The symmetries
of the strain tensor C̄ have been used to reduce the computations. Here again, many macroscopic strain states lead
to divergence of the computations and resulted in an incomplete database. The procedure described in Section 3.2.5
has been used. The macroscopic mesh is depicted in Fig. 20(b). The discretization of the strain domain has been


                                                       Δu




                                                       0                  Δu



                       L
                                     R


                                           L         (a)                                       (b)

FIG. 20: (a) Geometry and boundary conditions for the two-scale example 4.4; (b) Finite element mesh associated
with the macrostructure.



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
222                                                                                                           Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



performed with p = 11. The separated representation led to R = 49 sets of basis vectors for the above strain domain.
The resultant force on the boundary x = L is depicted in Fig. 21 and compared with the FE2 reference solution.
Here again, during the simulation, many points of the structure fell outside of the strain domain and the extrapolation
procedure of Section 3.2.6 was required, which did not affect the good agreement between the NEXP and reference
solutions.

5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a fully nonconcurrent or sequential multiscale method to compute the response of
structures made of heterogeneous hyperelastic materials. For this purpose, a database containing discrete values of
the effective strain energy function in the macroscopic Cauchy-Green strain space is constructed and stored. Then,
a reduced basis approximation is constructed to reduce the computations at the macroscopic scale and to simplify
extrapolation techniques. The main steps of the procedure are (i) Define a representative volume element associated
with the microstructure. (ii) Define the space of macroscopic strains (Cauchy-Green components) and discretize it into
a finite number of nodes. Then, for each node, the corresponding boundary conditions are prescribed on the RVE and
the problem is solved numerically to evaluate the effective strain density function (potential). (iii) During structure
calculations, the stress and tangent elastic tensors are determined for any point of the strain domain by interpolating
the database values. To efficiently evaluate these values, a reduced database model is constructed by means of a
tensor product approximation (parafac method). Compared to nonlinear homogenization at small strains, two main
issues may arise. First, it is difficult to define a macroscopic strain domain such that during the structure calculation,
all points remain within the strain domain. Second, due to the choice of the parametrization as a function of the
macroscopic Cauchy-Green tensor components, some points in the strain domain might correspond to nonadmissible
strain states or to nonconverged finite element computations, due to severe distortions in the RVE. To handle the
first difficulty, we have extrapolated the database outside of the strain domain, exploiting the multilinear structure of
the reduced model approximation. We have proposed to treat the second one by means of an algorithm extending
the database in regions of missing data to maintain the same interpolation scheme. Different 2D numerical examples
show a good accuracy of the method for the various tests encountered. One major concern in applying this method
to 3D problems relies on the cost related to the database calculations. Even though all calculations can be performed
independently on parallel processors, the complexity can remain high. Among the various approaches that could be


                                                0.9

                                                0.8         NEXP, p=11
                                                            FE2
                                                0.7
                                       y
                          Macroscopic Force F




                                                0.6

                                                0.5

                                                0.4

                                                0.3

                                                0.2

                                                0.1

                                                 0
                                                      0   0.05           0.1           0.15           0.2
                                                                  Macroscopic strain

                 FIG. 21: Macroscopic response of the structure in biaxial stretching (example 4.4).



                                                                                       Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                                            223



considered to deal with this issue, reduced parameterizations, or direct identification of tensor-product approximations
on random samplings in the strain space, could be envisaged in future studies.


REFERENCES
Abeyaratne, R. and Triantafyllidis, N., An investigation of localization in a porous elastic material using homogenization theory,
  ASME J. Appl. Mech., vol. 51, pp. 481–486, 1984.
Aboudi, J., Finite strain micromechanical modeling of multiphase composites, Int. J. Multiscale Comput. Eng., vol. 6, no. 5, pp.
  411–434, 2008.
Bouchart, V., Brieu, M., Kondo, D., and Abdelaziz, M. N., Implementation and numerical verification of a non-linear homogeniza-
  tion method applied to hyperelastic composites, Comput. Mat. Sci., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 670–680, 2004.
Carol, J. D. and Chang, J. J., Analysis of individual differences in multidimensional scaling via an n-way generalization of ’Eckart-
  Young’ decomposition, Psychometrika, vol. 35, pp. 283–319, 1970.
Chevalier, L. and Marco, Y., Tools for multiaxial validation of behavior laws chosen for modeling hyper-elasticity of rubber-like
  materials, Polym. Eng. Sci., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 280–298, 2002.
Clément, A., Soize, C., and Yvonnet, J., Computational nonlinear stochastic homogenization using anon-concurrent multiscale
   approach for hyperelastic heterogenous microstructures analysis, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng., vol. 91, no. 8, pp. 799–824,
   2012.
deBotton, G., Transversally isotropic sequentially laminated composites in finite elasticity, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 53, no. 6,
  pp. 1334–1361, 2005.
deBotton, G., Mariton, I., and Socolsky, E. A., Neo-hookean fiber-reinforced composites in finite elasticity, J. Mech. Phys. Solids,
  vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 533–559, 2006.
deBotton, G. and Shmuel, G., Mechanics of composites with two families of finitely extensible fibers undergoing large deforma-
  tions, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1165–1181, 2009.
Feyel, F., Multiscale FE2 elastoviscoplastic analysis of composite structure, Comput. Mater. Sci., vol. 16, nos. 1–4, pp. 433–454,
  1999.
Feyel, F., A multilevel finite element method (FE2 ) to describe the response of highly non-linear structures using generalized
  continua, Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 192, pp. 3233–3244, 2003.
Feyel, F. and Chaboche, J.-L., FE2 multiscale approach for modelling the elastoviscoplastic behaviour of long fiber SiC/Ti com-
  posite materials, Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 183, pp. 309–330, 2000.
Gendy, A. S. and Saleeb, A. F., Nonlinear meterial parameter estimation for characterizing hyperelastic large strain models, Com-
  put. Mech., vol. 25, pp. 66–77, 2000.
Ghosh, S., Lee, K., and Raghavan, P., A multilevel computational model for multi-scale damage analysis in composite and porous
  media, Int. J. Solids Struct., vol. 38, pp. 2335–2385, 2001.
Harshman, A., Foundations of the parafac procedure: Models and conditions for an explanatory multi-modal factor analysis, UCLA
  Working Papers in Phonetics, vol. 16, pp. 1–84, 1970.
He, Q.-C., Le Quang, H., and Feng, Z. Q., Exact results for the homogenization of elastic fiber-reinforced solids at finite strain, J.
  Elast., vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 153–177, 2006.
Kiers, H. A. L., Toward a standardized notation and terminology in multiway analysis, J. Chemom., vol. 14, pp. 105–122, 2000.
Kouznetsova, V. G., Geers, M. G. D., and Brekelmans, W. A. M., Multi-scale second order computational homogenization of
  multi-phase materials: a nested finite element solution strategy, Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 193, pp. 5525–5550,
  2004.
Lahellec, N., Mazerolle, F., and Michel, J. C., Second-order estimates for the macroscopic behavior of periodic hyperelastic
  composites: theory and experimental validation, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 27–49, 2004.
Lamari, H., Ammar, A., Legrain, P. C. F., Chinesta, F., and Jacquemin, F., Routes for efficient computational homogenization
  of nonlinear materials using the proper generalized decompositions, Arch. Comput. Method Eng., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 373–391,
  2010.
Li, S. and Wang, G., Introduction to Micromechanics and Nanomechanics, World Scientific, Singapore, 2008.



Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
224                                                                                                      Yvonnet, Monteiro, & He



Lopez-Pamies, O. and Ponte-Castaneda, P., Second-order estimates for the macroscopic response and loss of ellipticity in porous
  rubbers at large deformations, J. Elast., vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 247–287, 2004.
Lopez-Pamies, O. and Ponte-Castaneda, P., On the overall behavior, microstructure evolution, and macroscopic stability in rein-
  forced rubbers at large deformations: I - Theory, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 54, pp. 807–830, 2006.
Mathworks, MATLAB Tensor Toolbox Version 2.4 (released Mar. 22,                          2010) Sandia National Laboratories,
 http://csmr.ca.sandia.gov/ tgkolda/TensorToolbox/, 2010.
Michel, J. C., Lopez-Pamies, P., Ponte-Castaneda, P., and Triantafyllidis, N., Microscopic and macroscopic instabilities in finitely
  strained porous elastomers, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 55, pp. 900–938, 2007.
Monteiro, E., Yvonnet, J., and He, Q.-C., Computational homogenization for nonlinear conduction in heterogeneous materials
 using model reduction, Comput. Mater. Sci., vol. 42, pp. 704–712, 2008.
Ogden, R. W., Extremum principles in non-linear elasticity and their application to composites - I. Theory, Int. J. Solids Struct.,
  vol. 14, pp. 265–282, 1978.
Ogden, R. W., Saccomandi, G., and Sgura, I., Fitting hyperelastic models to experimental data, Comput. Mech., vol. 34, pp.
  484–502, 2004.
Ponte-Castaneda, P. and Tiberio, E., Second-order homogenization method in finite elasticity and applications to black-filled elas-
  tomers, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 48, nos. 6–7, pp. 1389–1411, 2000.
Smit, R., Brekelmans, W., and Meijer, H., Prediction of the mechanical behavior of nonlinear heterogeneous systems by multi-level
  finite element modeling, Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 155, pp. 181–192, 1998.
Takano, N., Zako, M., and Ohnishi, Y., Macro-micro uncoupled homogenization procedure for microscopic nonlinear behavior
  analysis of composites, Mater. Sci. Res. Int., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 81–86, 1996.
Temizer, I. and Wriggers, P., An adaptive method for homogenization in orthotropic nonlinear elasticity, Comput. Methods Appl.
  Mech. Eng., vols. 35–36, pp. 3409–3423, 2007.
Temizer, I. and Zohdi, T. I., A numerical method for homogenization in non-linear elasticity, Comput. Mech., vol. 40, no. 2, pp.
  281–298, 2007.
Terada, K. and Kikuchi, N., Nonlinear homogenization method for practical applications, in S. Ghosh and M. Ostoja-Starzewski
  Eds., Comput. Methods Micromech., Proc. of the ASME Int. Mechanical Engineering Congress and Expos., vol. AMD-
  Vol.212/MD-vol.62, pp. 1–6, 1995.
Terada, K. and Kikuchi, N., A class of general algorithms for multi-scale analysis of heterogeneous media, Comput. Method Appl.
  Mech. Eng., vol. 190, pp. 5427–5464, 2001.
Tran, A. B., Yvonnet, J., He, Q.-C., Toulemonde, C., and Sanahuja, J., A simple computational homogenization method for
  structures made of heterogeneous linear viscoelastic materials, Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 200, nos. 45–46, pp.
  2956–2970, 2011.
Triantafyllidis, N., Nestorović, M. D., and Schraad, M. W., Failure surfaces for finitely strained two-phase periodic solids under
   general in-plane loading, ASME J. Appl. Mech., vol. 73, pp. 505–515, 2006.
Triantafyllidis, N. and Schnaidt, W., Comparison of microscopic and macroscopic instabilities in a class of two-dimensional peri-
   odic composites, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 1533–1565, 1993.
Yvonnet, J., Gonzalez, D., and He, Q.-C., Numerically explicit potentials for the homogenization of nonlinear elastic heterogeneous
  materials, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 198, pp. 2723–2737, 2009.
Yvonnet, J. and He, Q.-C., The reduced model multiscale method (R3M) for the non-linear homogenization of hyperelastic media
  at finite strains, J. Comput. Phys., vol. 223, pp. 341–368, 2007.
Zhang, T. and Golub, G. H., Rank-one approximation to high order tensor, SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 534–550,
  2001.


APPENDIX: WEAK FORMS FOR HYPERELASTICITY
The weak form related{to problems (2.19)–(2.20) is given
                                                      } by the following:
   Find u ∈ D, D = v|v(x) = ud (x) on ∂Ω, v ∈ S
                                 ∫
                                    S(u) : δE(u, δu)dΩ = 0           ∀δu ∈ D0 ,                                               (A1)
                                        Ω




                                                                                Journal for Multiscale Computational Engineering
Computational Homogenization of Hyperelastic Materials                                                      225


          {                       }
where D0 = v|v(x) = 0 on ∂Ω, v ∈ S , S being a space of sufficiently smooth functions, and δE is expressed by

                                               1[                             ]
                                δE(u; δu) =      ∇X (δu)T F(u) + F(u)T ∇X (δu) .                           (A2)
                                               2
   As problem (A1) is nonlinear, an iterative procedure is required to solve it. For example, using the Newton-
Raphson method, one can use a linearized problem that must be solved at each iteration k:
  ∫                                           ∫                                 ∫
     δE(uk , δu) : L(uk ) : δE(uk , ∆u)dΩ +     S(uk ) : ∆E(∆u, δu)dΩ = −           S(uk ) : δE(uk , δu)dΩ, (A3)
    Ω                                             Ω                            Ω

where uk is a displacement increment such that at iteration k + 1 we have uk+1 = uk + ∆u and
                                            1[                                   ]
                          ∆E(∆u, δu) =        ∇X (∆u)T ∇X (δu) + ∇X (δu)T ∇X (∆u) .                        (A4)
                                            2
   The weak form related to the macroscopic problem (2.21)–(2.22) is similar to (A2) by replacing macroscopic
quantities by micro ones. The related linearized form has also the same form as (A3) by replacing macroscopic
quantities by micro ones.




Volume 11, Number 3, 2013
