                                       Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
                                                   ScienceDirect

                                   Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 416 (2023) 116298
                                                                                                                  www.elsevier.com/locate/cma



           Hyper-reduction for Petrov–Galerkin reduced order models
        S. Ares de Pargaa,b ,∗, J.R. Bravoa,b , J.A. Hernándeza,b,c , R. Zorrillaa,b , R. Rossia,b
     a Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Building B0, Campus Nord, Jordi Girona

                                                        1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain
 b Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics en Enginyeria (CIMNE), Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Building C1, Campus Nord, Jordi

                                                    Girona 1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain
           c Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, E.S. d’Enginyeries Industrial, Aeroespacial i Audiovisual de Terrassa, C/ Colom,

                                                         11, Terrassa 08222, Spain
                           Received 27 March 2023; received in revised form 22 June 2023; accepted 20 July 2023
                                                    Available online 26 August 2023



Graphical Abstract




Abstract
   Projection-based Reduced Order Models are based on the idea of minimizing the discrete residual of a “full order model”
(FOM) while at the same time constraining the unknowns to live in a space of reduced dimension. For problems with symmetric

  ∗ Corresponding author at: Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Building B0, Campus
Nord, Jordi Girona 1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain.
    E-mail address: sebastian.ares@upc.edu (S. Ares de Parga).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2023.116298
0045-7825/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.     Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

positive definite (SPD) Jacobians, this minimization can be achieved optimally by projecting the full order residual onto the
approximation basis (Galerkin Projection). This approach is sub-optimal for problems with non-SPD Jacobians since it only
guarantees that the projection of the residual onto the chosen basis is minimized and not the residual itself. One possible
alternative in such cases is to directly minimize the 2-norm of the residual. This minimization can be achieved either by using
QR factorization to solve the resulting least-squares problem or by employing the method of the normal equations (LSPG) to
the same end. The first approach involves constructing and factorizing a rectangular tall and skinny matrix of size proportional
to the number of unknowns of the FOM. The LSPG method avoids the use of the large matrix by directly constructing
the product by its transpose. Unfortunately, constructing such a product element by element is not feasible and requires the
use of a complementary mesh, which adds an extra layer of complexity to the hyper-reduction process when performing mesh
sampling. The main idea of this work is to propose an alternative technique based on the idea of Petrov–Galerkin minimization.
Essentially, we choose a left basis so that a least-squares minimization procedure can be carried out on a reduced problem
while guaranteeing that the discrete full order residual is minimized. The resulting procedure is applicable to problems with
both SPD and non-SPD Jacobians. Additionally, the resulting minimization problem can be assembled element by element,
avoiding the use of the complementary mesh and simplifying implementation in the context of finite elements. The resulting
technique is amenable to hyper-reduction by the use of the Empirical Cubature Method and can be readily applied in the
context of nonlinear reduction procedures.
© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Keywords: Petrov–Galerkin; LSPG; Reduced Order Models; Hyper-reduction



1. Introduction
    Projection-based reduced order models (PROM) can significantly reduce the time and storage required for the
solution of high-fidelity (high-dimensional) discretized PDE based computational models for a given range of
parametric settings, also known as full-order models (FOM) in the literature. These PROMs are intended for the
creation of time-critical models such as digital twins, design/shape optimization, control problem optimization, and
other applications. Unfortunately, the cost of creating a PROM of dimension n scales with both n and the dimension
of the underlying FOM N ≫ n. To overcome this problem, one popular approach is to divide the computation into
two parts: one that scales with the FOM but can be executed offline to compute some numerical quantities; and
another that uses the aforementioned numerical quantities to perform all online computations with a complexity that
is independent of the FOM’s large dimension. The first part of this offline–online decomposition is at the heart of
model order reduction, where the state of a large-scale system resides on a lower dimensional manifold engendered
by time evolution and/or input parameter variation. To do this, solution snapshots corresponding to a carefully chosen
set of input parameters are subjected to dimensionality reduction (compression) in order to determine a reduced-
order basis (ROB), using, for instance, Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) [1,2]. The FOM is then projected
onto the subspace spanned by this ROB in order to provide rapid and accurate online numerical predictions. This
offline–online technique has been shown to be effective for parametric, linear problems [3,4], as well as nonlinear
problems with a low-order polynomial dependency [5,6].
    Similarly, computational methods known as hyper-reduction have gained popularity in overcoming computational
bottlenecks caused by repeated re-evaluations of parametric reduced-order operators. These methods approximate
these operators with a computational cost that is independent of the FOM, trading some of the PROM’s accuracy for
speed. Carlberg first introduced the classification of hyper-reduction methods into two types: the approximate-then-
project and the project-then-approximate, as described in [7]. The approximate-then-project hyper-reduction methods
approximate first an operator of interest and then project the approximation onto the left ROB. The underlying idea
for avoiding a computational cost that grows with the problem’s large dimension N may be traced back to the
gappy POD technique, which was initially devised for image reconstruction [8]. After nearly a decade, the empirical
interpolation method was launched on a continuous level with its discrete variant known as discrete EIM (DEIM) [9],
which is likely the most popular approximate-then-project hyper-reduction method to date. Other approximate-then-
project hyper-reduction methods have been introduced, such as the missing point estimation [10] and the collocation
method [11]. Another noteworthy approximate-then-project hyper-reduction method is the Gauss–Newton with
approximated tensors (GNAT) method [12], which was conceived for the Petrov–Galerkin projection rather than the
Galerkin framework. On the other hand, hyper-reduction methods of the project-then-approximate type approximate
directly the projection onto the left ROB. They can be regarded as extended quadrature rules, in which the set of
                                                                 2
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

quadrature “points” and associated weights are learned via a supervised method on an empirical set of training
data. Among this family of methods, we can find the energy-conserving sampling and weighting (ECSW) method
developed in Ref. [13], and the empirical cubature method (ECM) [14,15]. These methods compute a subset of the
underlying FOM’s elements (or other entities) that define the quadrature points, then construct an approximation of
the full solution, which is commonly known as mesh sampling.
   Hyper-reduction methods have been widely demonstrated to produce numerically stable hyper-reduced PROMs
(HPROM) [9–11,13–17], especially for standard Galerkin PROM. By definition, in a Galerkin projection, the left
(Ψ) and right (Φ) ROBs are set to be equal, or the test and approximation spaces are the same (Ψ = Φ).
The first methods that explored the acceleration of Petrov–Galerkin (PG) PROM, where the left and right ROBs
differ (Ψ ̸= Φ), are of the approximate-then-project type. These include a gappy-POD-like method, similar to
DEIM, called the Gauss–Newton with approximated tensors (GNAT) method [7,12,18,19], and a least-squares
variant of the collocation method [11]. The GNAT was developed in the context of PG-PROMs, especially for
PG-PROMs in which the left ROB is chosen to minimize the discrete, nonlinear residual over the approximation
subspace associated with the right ROB in the 2-norm. In this scenario, applying Newton’s technique to solve the
system of equations is equal to using the Gauss–Newton method to solve the nonlinear, least-squares minimization
problem. As a result, the PG-PROM method on which GNAT is based is commonly referred to as the least-squares
Petrov–Galerkin (LSPG) projection method in the literature [7]. Essentially, when the Jacobian (J) associated with
the Gauss–Newton method results in a symmetric positive definite (SPD) operator, the Galerkin PROM can be
shown to minimize the discrete, nonlinear residual in a J−1 -norm, whereas the LSPG-PROM can be used for the
general case where the Jacobian associated with the Gauss–Newton method is not SPD. For example, when the
Jacobian comes from the discretization of the Navier–Stokes equations, the Galerkin PROM approach lacks the
minimum-residual optimality property. However, all approximate-then-project methods, such as GNAT, are based
on sub-optimal greedy algorithms that take the size of the reduced mesh as input, which is unknown a priori.
Recently, a project-then-approximate method for the hyper-reduction of PG-PROMs was developed, presenting an
Energy-Conserving Sampling and Weighting (ECSW) type method [13]. This method was extended to PROMs
based on local, piecewise-affine approximation subspaces and generalized to finite elements spatial discretizations,
as well as finite volume, and finite differences semi-discretizations.
   However, in order to evaluate the hyper-reduced residual vectors and Jacobian matrices associated with the
selected elements and their neighbors, PG-PROMs require a complementary mesh to be constructed [20]. This
means that the hyper-reduced sample mesh must include the patch of elements that contains the selected elements
as a complementary mesh, significantly increasing the number of elements required to integrate the hyper-reduced
model.1 The issue arises from the iteration-dependent left ROB of the LSPG-PROM.
   In this paper, we propose a novel approach to address the problem of using a complementary mesh for hyper-
reduction by introducing an equivalent invariant left ROB Ψ that preserves the 2-norm minimum-residual optimality.
We obtain two different invariant ROBs (Ψ ̸= Φ) and an alternative PG-PROM by compressing either the converged
projected Jacobians onto the right ROB or the non-converged residuals. Additionally, we utilize the empirical
cubature method (ECM) to carry out the PG-PROM hyper-reduction without the need for a complementary mesh.
ECM identifies a reduced subset of elements and corresponding positive weights, which are calculated from a
minimization of the entire unassembled residual projected onto the left ROB Ψ. Our proposed approach offers a
novel solution to the problem of avoiding the use of a complementary mesh for hyper-reduction and represents a
significant contribution to the field.

2. Parametrized problem
   Let us consider a general nonlinear parametrized discrete operator of the form
       Rt (ut ; µ) = R(uref + ∆u(t; µ), t; µ) = 0,                                                                                      (1)
where t ∈ [0, T ] represents time up to a final time T . With a minor abuse of notation, we use the subscript t to
denote that a variable is evaluated at a specific time instance t. The term ut = uref + ∆ut ∈ R N designates the
nodal state variable evaluated at the specific time instance t. Here, uref represents a reference solution, often based
 1 This behavior should not be confused with hyper-reducing a finite volume model [12,21,22], where it is shown that for the collocation
mesh, it is necessary to include neighboring cells (and neighbors of neighbors for second order schemes) to compute the governing equations.
                                                                     3
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

on the solution at the previous time step, ut−1 .2 We have intentionally omitted the explicit dependency of ut on
the parameter µ for simplicity of exposition. However, it is important to emphasize that ut intrinsically depends
on µ, and this dependency will be explicitly denoted when necessary for clarity and instructional purposes. The
vector µ ∈ D denotes a specific instance of the input parameters, where D ⊂ R P represents the discrete point-set
of all possible input parameter vectors. The discrete operator Rt : R N × D → R N will be referred to as the residual
vector. For simplicity of exposition, homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions are considered. This high fidelity
model will be referred to as the full-order model (FOM). The residual vector is assembled in the usual manner by
summing the elemental contributions, which can be expressed as:
                 L
                 ∑       T
          Rt =         Le Ret ,                                                                                                        (2)
                 e=1

where L denotes the total number of elements, and Le is the assembly operator that connects the degrees of freedom
(DOFs) of element e with the global DOFs. The vector Ret represents the values of the elemental residual associated
with the DOFs of element e.
   An iterative scheme, such as the Newton–Raphson strategy, is required to find a solution ut for the nonlinear
residual Rt , resulting in the following iterations: for k = 1, . . . , K , solve

          J(k) (k)    (k)   (k) (k)
           t (ut ; µ)pt = −Rt (ut ; µ)

                  ∆u(k+1)
                    t     = ∆u(k)  (k) (k)
                              t + αt p t                                                                                               (3)
                       u(k+1)
                        t     = u(k)   (k+1)
                                 t + ∆ut     ,

where J represents the Jacobian operator, and ∆u is the increment of the solution state variable at each iteration. R(k)
                                                                                                                     t
and J(k)                                                                            (k)                (k)
      t are the residual and Jacobian evaluated at the current iterative solution ut . Specifically, Rt = Rt |u(k) =
                                                                                                                   t
                                  ∂Rt ⏐
R(uref + ∆u(k)              (k)
            t , t; µ), and Jt =
                                                         (k)
                                        (k) = J(uref + ∆ut , t; µ).
                                      ⏐
                                            ∂u ut
   The process carries out iterations until convergence is reached, thereby finding the solution ut for the specified
time step t and the given parameter set µ. Notably, a line search could potentially be employed in the direction
of p ∈ R N to determine the step length α. For a comprehensive understanding and more specific details about the
procedure, please refer to Algorithm 1. We used the Newton–Raphson method throughout this work for clarity of
presentation. However, it is worth noting that if the Jacobian matrix is not available or computationally expensive
to compute, one could use a fixed-point iteration method such as Picard’s method instead of the Newton–Raphson
method.
Algorithm 1: Newton-Raphson strategy for FOM.
 1      Input: State variable uref
 2      Output: State variable ut and increment update ∆ut
                       (0)           (0)
     1: Initialize ∆ut = 0, i.e., ut = uref
     2: for k = 0, . . . , K (convergence) do
     3:    Evaluate residual R(k)t = Rt |u(k)
                                           ⏐t
                                       ∂Rt ⏐
     4:    Evaluate Jacobian J(k) t =  ∂u ut  (k)
                   (k) (k)       (k)
     5:     Solve Jt pt = −Rt
     6:     Update ∆ut(k+1) = ∆u(k)        (k) (k)
                                     t + αt pt
                     (k+1)    (k)       (k+1)
     7:     Update ut      = ut + ∆ut
     8: end for
                ∑K     k+1
     9: ∆ut =    k=1 ∆ut
                  (K +1)
     10: ut = ut             ≡ uref + ∆ut


  2 If necessary, the reference solution u
                                          ref can be enhanced with methods like extrapolation based on the derivatives of ut−1 with respect
to time. This can provide more accurate initial conditions, aiding in the stability and convergence of the iterative scheme.
                                                                    4
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

3. Petrov–Galerkin projection

   We begin by approximating the solution state variable as a linear combination of n orthogonal basis vectors
φi ∈ R N and coefficients ∆û ∈ Rn . Here, variables denoted with a hat represent those of the reduced order
dimension n. Consequently, we obtain
       ∆ũt (µ) = Φ∆ût (µ).                                                                                                            (4)
   This approximation enables us to update the solution, now referred to as ũt . The tilde notation indicates the
approximate nature of this variable. Thus, the updated solution is given by
       ũt = uref + Φ∆ût (µ).                                                                                                          (5)
   The right ROB Φ is selected through Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD), which involves compressing a set
of snapshots collected from the Full Order Model (FOM) simulations for carefully chosen parameters. Specifically,
the finite element equations are solved for appropriately chosen values of the input parameter space D, and the state
variables are stored in snapshot matrices3
       Au = u1 (µ1 ), u2 (µ1 ), . . . , uT (µ1 ), u1 (µ2 ), u2 (µ2 ), . . . , uT (µ2 ), . . . , uT (µ P ).
              [                                                                                            ]
                                                                                                                  (6)
The solution basis matrix Φ is obtained as a linear combination of the columns of Au , i.e.,
       col(Φ) ⊂ col(Au )                                                                                                                (7)
(the column space of Φ is a subspace of the column space of Au ). The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD)
method aims to reduce the number of columns in Φ while preserving the essential patterns of the solution state
variable. To achieve this, an error threshold 0 ≤ ϵu < 1 is defined, and a basis matrix Φ is sought such that:
      A − ΦΦT Au  ≤ ϵu Au  ,
       u                      
                        F            F
                                                                                                               (8)
where ∥·∥ F denotes the Frobenius norm. One approach to finding this matrix is through truncated Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) [23] (see Appendix), which decomposes Au as follows:
       Au = Φn Σn VnT + E,                                                                                                              (9)
where Φn is a matrix containing the first n left singular vectors of Au , Σn is a diagonal matrix containing the first
n singular values, and Vn is the matrix of the first n right singular vectors. The truncation to n modes allows for a
low-rank approximation of Au , and the remaining term E accounts for the approximation error.
   When Eq. (5) is substituted into Eq. (1), an over-determined system of N nonlinear equations with n unknowns
is obtained, where n ≪ N , given by:
       Rt (ũt ; µ) = R(uref + Φ∆ût (µ), t; µ) = 0.                                                                                   (10)
To obtain an approximate solution to this system of N nonlinear equations with n unknowns, m constraints are
imposed by requiring the orthogonality of the nonlinear residual to a left ROB Ψ ∈ R N ×m . This process reduces
the number of equations in the system from N to m, resulting in a simplified system of m state equations with n
unknowns given by
       ΨtT Rt (uref + Φ∆ût (µ); µ) = 0.                                                                                               (11)
Typically, the order of m is similar to the order of n (O(m) = O(n)), where m ≪ N . However, to avoid an
under-determined system, it is necessary to ensure that m is greater than or equal to n (m ≥ n) when reducing
an over-determined system to a simplified system of m state equations with n unknowns, in order to ensure a
well-posed problem. When m ̸= n, the minimization problem can be addressed using QR decomposition.

  3 Although using u and ∆u in snapshot generation theoretically results in the same column space under exact arithmetic or machine
tolerance in randomized singular value decomposition (i.e., col(Au ) ⊆ col(A∆u )), we have presented the total approach in this work for its
didactic value.
                                                                     5
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.              Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

    Applying Newton–Raphson to solve the reduced non-linear system to find a solution ut results in the following
iterations: for k = 1, . . . , K , solve

           ΨtT (k) J(k)  (k)      (k)   T (k) (k) (k)
                    t (ũt ; µ)Φp̂t = −Ψt    Rt (ũt ; µ)
                                                    (k) (k)
                                ∆ût(k+1) = ∆û(k)
                                               t + αt p̂t                                                                           (12)
                                   ũt(k+1) = ũ(k)     (k+1)
                                                t + Φ∆ût     ,

where p̂t(k) ∈ Rn . The detailed procedure is given in Algorithm 2.
   The quality of the approximate solution obtained is contingent on both the selection of the basis Ψt and the
number of constraints imposed. A suitable basis, along with the optimal number of constraints, may be chosen to
obtain a sufficiently accurate approximation of the original over-determined system of equations. Although other
techniques based on Petrov–Galerkin frameworks have been introduced in the literature where the left ROB changes
over iterations, i.e., Ψ(k)
                        t , this work presents a novel approach in Section 5 for a Petrov–Galerkin framework that
finds an invariant or constant left ROB, i.e. Ψ, while preserving the minimum-residual optimality that will be
discussed in the following section.
Algorithm 2: Newton-Raphson strategy for general PG-PROM.
 1       Input: State variable uref and right ROB Φ
 2       Output: State variable ũt and increment update ∆ũt
                        (0)           (0)
      1: Initialize ∆ût = 0, i.e., ũt = uref
      2: for k = 0, . . . , K (convergence) do
      3:    Evaluate residual R(k)t = Rt |ũ(k)
                                            ⏐t
                                        ∂Rt ⏐
      4:    Evaluate Jacobian J(k) t =         (k)
                                          ∂ ũ ũt
                        T (k)
      5:       Compute Ψt     (see Section 3.1)
      6:       Compute W(k) = ΨtT (k) J(k)
                                       t Φ
      7:     if m ̸= n then
      8:        Compute QR decomposition W(k) = Q(k) D(k)
      9:        Solve D(k) p̂(k)
                               t = −Q
                                         T (k) T (k) (k)
                                              Ψ t Rt
     10:     else
     11:        Solve W(k) p̂(k)t = −Ψt
                                          T (k) (k)
                                               Rt
     12:     end if
                                                 (k) (k)
     13:     Update ∆ût(k+1) = ∆û(k)  t + αt p̂t
     14:     Update ũ(k+1)
                         t     = ũ(k)
                                    t + Φ∆ût
                                                (k+1)

     15: end for
                      ∑K           k+1
     16: ∆ũt = Φ          k=1 ∆ût
                  (K +1)
     17: ũt = ũt         ≡ uref + ∆ũt


3.1. Optimal left ROB

   The left ROB Ψt is chosen here to minimize the non-linear residual in some norm Gt in order to meet
the minimum-residual optimality of the projection approximation. Specifically, we seek to solve the following
minimization problem:
                                    2
              1
      min Rt (uref + Φ∆ût (µ); µ)
                                     
                                                                                                        (13)
     ∆ût ∈R 2
            n                        
                                      Gt

where ∥ · ∥Gt denotes a norm defined by a symmetric, positive definite (SPD) matrix Gt ∈ R N ×N . Alternatively, we
can write the above problem as follows:
                   1
            min         Rt (ũt ; µ)T Gt Rt (ũt ; µ).                                                                              (14)
           ∆ût ∈Rn 2
                                                                         6
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.          Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

By satisfying the minimum-residual optimality of Eq. (13), a general relationship between projection-based
reduced-order models and minimum-residual reduced-order models can be established, as follows:
       ∂Rt (ũt ; µ) ∂ ũ T
     [                       ]
                                Gt Rt (ũt ; µ) = 0
           ∂ ũ       ∂∆ût                                                                           (15)
                             ]T
                Jt (ũt ; µ)Φ Gt Rt (ũt ; µ) = 0,
              [

with the structure of the PROM in Eq. (11); this yields
           Ψt = Gt Jt (ũt ; µ)Φ,                                                                                               (16)
which is sufficient to satisfy the minimum-residual property for a general PROM. For further details, please refer
to [24].

3.1.1. Galerkin projection
   The Galerkin projection produces search directions p̂(k)                                            −1
                                                        t that are minimum-residual optimal with Gt = Jt  when
the Jacobians are SPD matrices; that is,
           Ψt (ũt ; µ) = J−1
                           t (ũt ; µ)Jt (ũt ; µ)Φ = Φ,                                                                        (17)
where the right ROB Φ is constant. Consequently, the left ROB no longer depends on time and the parameter,
becoming Ψt (ũt ; µ) = Ψ, see Ref. [25]. The Newton–Raphson system is then transformed into the following
iterations: for k = 1, . . . , K , solve

           ΦT J(k)  (k)      (k)   T (k) (k)
               t (ũt ; µ)Φp̂t = −Φ Rt (ũt ; µ)
                                                (k) (k)
                             ∆û(k+1)
                                t     = ∆û(k)
                                           t + αt p̂t                                                                           (18)
                               ũt(k+1) = ũ(k)     (k+1)
                                            t + Φ∆ût     ,
see Algorithm 3 for more details.
   However, the Galerkin projection does not guarantee that the residual is minimized since the Jacobians of a
nonlinear problem are not in general SPD matrices. As a result, a different projection for general non-linear problems
was introduced in Ref. [7], and is discussed in the following section.
Algorithm 3: Newton-Raphson strategy for Galerkin-PROM.
 1       Input: State variable uref and right ROB Φ
 2       Output: State variable ũt and increment update ∆ũt
                        (0)           (0)
      1: Initialize ∆ût = 0, i.e., ũt = uref
      2: for k = 0, . . . , K (convergence) do
      3:    Evaluate residual R(k)t = Rt |ũ(k)
                                            ⏐t
                                        ∂Rt ⏐
      4:    Evaluate Jacobian J(k) t =         (k)
                                           ∂ ũ ũt
                               (k)   T (k)
      5:       Compute W = Φ Jt Φ
      6:       Solve W(k) p̂(k)
                            t = −Φ Rt
                                       T (k)
                           (k+1)                 (k) (k)
      7:       Update ∆ût       = ∆û(k)
                                        t + αt p̂t
      8:       Update ũ(k+1)
                        t      = ũ(k)
                                   t + Φ∆ût
                                                (k+1)

      9: end for
                  ∑K      k+1
     10: ∆ũt = Φ  k=1 ∆ût
                    (K +1)
     11: ũt = ũt           ≡ uref + ∆ũt


3.1.2. Least-squares Petrov–Galerkin (LSPG) projection
   Nonlinear problems often result in Jacobians that are not SPD. In such cases, the LSPG method satisfies the
condition in Eq. (16) by setting Gt = I, where I ∈ R N ×N is the identity matrix. This ensures that the method
exhibits the minimum-residual property, leading to the following equation:
           Ψt (ũt ; µ) = Jt (ũt ; µ)Φ.                                                                                        (19)
                                                                     7
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

The above equation leads to the Gauss–Newton iterations, which are given by the following steps: for k = 1, . . . , K ,
solve
      [                ]T                        [                   ]T
        J(k)    (k)
         t (ũt ; µ)Φ     J(k)  (k)        (k)       (k) (k)
                           t (ũt ; µ)Φp̂t = − Jt (ũt ; µ)Φ            R(k)  (k)
                                                                         t (ũt ; µ)
                                                               
             T (k) (k)                                  T (k) (k)
           Ψt (ũt ;µ)                                 Ψt (ũt ;µ)                                                (20)
                                                             (k) (k)
                                    ∆ût(k+1) = ∆û(k)
                                                   t   +   α t  p̂t

                                             ũt(k+1) = ũ(k)     (k+1)
                                                          t + Φ∆ût     .

Note that the chosen left ROB Ψt (ũt ; µ) = Jt (ũt ; µ)Φ changes from one Newton iteration to another (see Algorithm
4 for more details).
Algorithm 4: Gauss-Newton strategy for LSPG-PROM.
 1       Input: State variable uref and right ROB Φ
 2       Output: State variable ũt and increment update ∆ũt
                        (0)              (0)
      1: Initialize ∆ût = 0, i.e., ũt = uref
      2: for k = 0, . . . , K (convergence) do
      3:    Evaluate residual R(k)t = Rt |ũ(k)
                                               ⏐t
                                           ∂Rt ⏐
      4:    Evaluate Jacobian J(k) t = ∂ ũ ũ(k)
                                              [ t    ]T
      5:    Compute left ROB Ψt = J(k)
                                     T (k)
                                                  t Φ

      6:     Compute W(k) = ΨtT (k) J(k)   t Φ
      7:     Solve W(k) p̂(k)t =  −Ψ   T (k) (k)
                                       t     Rt
                                                  (k) (k)
      8:     Update ∆û(k+1)
                           t     =  ∆  û(k)
                                         t + αt p̂t
                        (k+1)      (k)           (k+1)
      9:     Update ũt        = ũt + Φ∆ût
     10: end for
                     ∑K           k+1
     11: ∆ũt = Φ         k=1 ∆ût
                 (K +1)
     12: ũt = ũt       ≡ uref + ∆ũt

   Nonlinear PROMs typically involve at least one step that increases in computational complexity with the
size of the FOM, even though the nonlinear system that defines the reduced-order model is much smaller. To
overcome this bottleneck, many nonlinear PROM methods include a hyper-reduction technique that adds an
additional approximation. For instance, in Newton–Raphson methods, the residual vector R(k)             t (ũt ; µ), Jacobian
matrix Jt(k) (ũt ; µ), and matrix–vector products for all entities or elements of the FOM are evaluated at each iteration
for all time steps. Hyper-reduction techniques can tackle this bottleneck by evaluating these vectors and matrices
over a subset of elements, significantly reducing the computational burden without compromising accuracy. It is
worth noting that if the left ROB is variant or iteration-dependent (Ψ(k)   t (ũt ; µ)), it may pose a disadvantage to the
“hyper-reduction” strategy. In such cases, constructing the PROM element by element becomes infeasible, and a
complementary mesh needs to be used for the reduced mesh. Details regarding the need for a complementary mesh
approach are discussed in the following section.

4. Hyper-reduction
     To discuss hyper-reduction, let us first revisit Eq. (11) for convenience:
           ΨtT Rt (uref + Φ∆ût (µ); µ) = 0.
For the assembly of elemental contributions, this expression takes the following form:
                          L                L                 L
                          ∑       T        ∑                 ∑    T
           ΨtT Rt = ΨtT         Le Ret =     (Le Ψt )T Ret =   Ψet Ret = 0,                                                   (21)
                          e=1              e=1               e=1
where L denotes the total number of elements, and for each element, Le is the assembly operator, Ret is the elemental
residual vector, and Ψet represents the values of the left ROB associated with the elemental degrees of freedom. As
                                                                   8
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.            Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

previously mentioned, this equation shows that although the equation-solving effort has drastically diminished with
n ≪ N , the computational complexity of the problem still scales with the size of the discretization of the underlying
finite elements. This is because it is necessary to loop over the L finite elements of the mesh to assemble the residual
vectors and Jacobian matrices.
    As demonstrated in [13,15], one may approximate the Petrov–Galerkin projection of the residual onto the left
ROB, given by Eq. (21), by finding a subset of elements z and positive weights ω such that
       ∑         T
           ωe Ψet Ret = 0.                                                                                          (22)
       e∈z

In other words, the subset of elements and their weights are chosen such that the resulting approximation of the
residual vector satisfies the projection property of the reduced order model. Specifically, the approximation of
the residual vector is obtained by summing over the chosen elements in z, where for each element e in z, the
                                                                                                              T
corresponding weight ωe ∈ ω is multiplied by the residual vector Ret and its corresponding left ROB values Ψet .
   The optimization problem for determining z and ω involves solving Eq. (21) using the same input parameters
as in the first reduction stage. The reduced equation is expressed in matrix format as follows:
       L                     [                                                        ]
       ∑        T               T                 T                        T
             Ψie Rie (µ j ) = Ψ1 Ri1 (µ j ),   Ψ2 Ri2 (µ j ),    ...,   Ψ L RiL (µ j ) 1 = bi (µ j ),           i = 1, 2, . . . , T,   (23)
       e=1

where bi (µ j ) ∈ Rm represents the sum of the projected residuals for all elements at the ith time step for the jth
parameter instance. Here, 1 denotes an all-ones vector.

Remark 4.1. Using the all-ones vector assumes that the mesh elements are similar enough to each other, such that
each element’s contribution to the projected residual is approximately equal. An alternative approach is to create a
weighting vector that incorporates a coefficient to account for the varying contributions, such as the volume of each
element [14]. If a weighting vector is used, then the residual should be scaled component-wise by its corresponding
weight.
   Let us construct a matrix X ∈ R(m×T ×P)×L by collecting the block column matrix from Eq. (23) for all training
parameters, which is given by:
                                                                                                     ]T
      X = X1 (µ1 ), X2 (µ1 ), . . . XT (µ1 ), X1 (µ2 ), X2 (µ2 ), . . . , XT (µ2 ), . . . , XT (µ P ) ,
           [
                                                                                                             (24)
where each block column Xi (µ j ) ∈ R L×m is given by:
                      T
                 ⎡                  ⎤
                   (Ψ1 Ri1 (µ j ))T
                 ⎢ 2T 2
                 ⎢ (Ψ Ri (µ j ))T ⎥
                                    ⎥
     Xi (µ j ) = ⎢      ..          ⎥.                                                                                                 (25)
                         .
                 ⎢                  ⎥
                 ⎣                  ⎦
                            T
                       (Ψ L RiL (µ j ))T
The discrete minimization problem statement is very similar to the statement for the continuous problem in Ref. [26].
The objective is to determine the optimal subset of elements and their corresponding weights. Therefore, we need
to find ω ∈ Rℓ+ and z ⊂ 1, 2, . . . , L such that:
       (ω, z) = arg min ∥Xz̄ ω̄ − b∥2 ,                                                                                                (26)
                       ω̄≥0,z̄

where Xz is the block matrix of X formed by the columns corresponding to the indexes z, and ω =
[ω1 , ω2 , . . . , ωℓ ]T . The goal is to select a set of ℓ elements from the L elements of the underlying finite element mesh
x1 , x2 , . . . , x L . For more information on the “Empirical Cubature Method” (ECM) for finding the optimal elements
and weights, we refer the reader to Refs. [14,15]. Unlike other methods in the literature [13,20], the Empirical
Cubature Method solves the minimization problem in Eq. (26) in terms of a set of orthogonal basis vectors rather
than snapshots of the raw discrete integrand X. To this end, the ECM requires obtaining an orthonormal matrix via
a truncated SVD as
       X = UΣΘ + E.                                                                                                                    (27)
                                                                        9
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.     Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

The matrix Θ ∈ R p×L is used to define a vector bΘ ∈ R L as
       Θ1 = bΘ ,                                                                                                           (28)
such that the equivalent optimization problem statement in Eq. (26) becomes:
       (ω, z) = arg min ∥Θz̄ ω̄ − bΘ ∥2 .                                                                                  (29)
                        ω̄≥0,z̄

The ECM algorithm for finding the optimal subset of elements and weights is described in detail in [15], and is
used in this work to address the hyper-reduction strategy. Note that the hyper-reduction approximation does not aim
to accurately represent the full-order residual (FOM), but only its projection onto the left subspace spanned by the
columns of the left reduced order basis (ROM).
   The hyper-reduction technique has been extensively studied in previous literature for the Galerkin projection [9–
11,13–17]. However, since it is a relatively new approach, only a limited number of studies have investigated
scenarios where the left reduced-order basis (ROB) differs [7,20,22,27]. This introduces some unique challenges to
the hyper-reduction scheme.

4.1. Extension to least-squares problems

   Let us consider the case when the minimization is performed in the 2-norm, which corresponds to Gt = I. In
this case, Eq. (13) becomes
       ΦT JtT (ũt ; µ)Rt (ũt ; µ) = 0.                                                                                   (30)
We define the Jacobian-weighted residual vector as follows:
       R̄t (ũt ; µ) = JtT Rt (ũt ; µ) = 0.                                                                               (31)
With this definition at hand, we can rewrite Eq. (30) as
       ΦT R̄t (ũt ; µ) = 0,                                                                                               (32)
which, except for the R̄t operator, is identical to Eq. (11) in the sense that it involves a ROB-weighted residual
quantity. However, because the Jacobian-weighted residual vector involves global quantities, it cannot be assembled
locally element by element. This means that it requires information from a “complementary mesh”, which is an
additional set of elements used to accurately represent the global behavior of the system on the reduced mesh.
   To further clarify this point, we can express Eq. (32) in terms of elemental contributions as follows:
                       ( L             )
                        ∑ T T
        T T          T        e   e  e
      Φ Jt Rt = Φ           L J t L Rt
                                  e=1
                         L
                         ∑            )T T
                                  Le Φ Jet Le )Rt
                           (
                    =(                                                                                                     (33)
                         e=1
                        ( L                   )
                         ∑          T   T
                    =             Φe Jet Le       Rt ,
                          e=1

where we introduce the elemental quantity
       RtLe := Le Rt .                                                                                                     (34)
The quantity RtLe signifies the entries of the assembled residual vector that correspond to the degrees of freedom
of element e. It is important not to confuse this quantity with Re , which denotes the contribution of element e to
the residual vector. To emphasize this distinction, note that RtLe and Re are not the same, i.e., RtLe ̸= Re .
   Therefore, we have
       L
       ∑        T
             Φe R̄et (ũt ; µ) = 0,                                                                                        (35)
       e=1
                                                                10
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 1. Patch of elements associated to a selected element of a 2D and 3D mesh. (a) 2D, (b) 3D. Red: Patch of elements, Blue: Selected
element. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)




where
                 T
       R̄et := Jet RtLe .                                                                                                            (36)
The main difference between the LSPG scheme and other schemes, such as Galerkin, is that the computation of R̄et
in the former requires determining residual vectors for all elements sharing nodes with element e, forming a patch
of elements, as shown in Fig. 1 . This feature necessitates constructing a complementary mesh based on the patch
of elements for a given set of elements z ⊂ 1, 2, . . . , L, regardless of the element selection method employed in
the hyper-reduction process [20]. This peculiarity of problems arising from minimization of residuals suggests that
the ECM search process should be adjusted such that, after selecting a specific element, its associated patches are
considered as candidates for the next step in the algorithm. This maximizes the overlap between patches. Using
the hyper-reduction scheme described in Section 4 for the variant left ROB would result in an increased number of
elements to consider in the finite element analyses.

5. Invariant left ROB approach
5.1. Formulation

   Let us revisit Eq. (30), which is reproduced below for convenience (in the case where Gt = I):
       rt = ΦT JtT (ũt ; µ)Rt (ũt ; µ) = 0.
This nonlinear equation can be interpreted as a Petrov–Galerkin projection in which the left subspace or the subspace
of constraints (a term borrowed from [25]) changes at each iteration. The left subspace in the preceding equation is
given by col(Jt Φ), where Jt is the Jacobian of the original finite element equations, and this matrix evolves during
the iterations. In light of the preceding observation, one may wonder whether it is possible to reformulate Eq. (30)
so that the left ROB matrix is held fixed during the iterations.
   The problem may be posed as follows: find an orthogonal matrix Ψ ∈ R N ×m such that
       ΨT Rt (ũt ; µ) = 0                                                                                                           (37)
for all input parameters µ used for determining the right ROB Φ ∈ R N ×n .
   In what follows, we describe and discuss two possible approaches for determining the left ROB Ψ. These two
alternatives will introduce a second training stage in which data will be gathered from the LSPG-PROM solution,
leading to an increase in offline computational cost. However, we demonstrate in the sequel that this increase in
computational effort is greatly repaid in the online stage, as the resulting PG-PROM requires far fewer elements
than the standard LSPG-PROM.
                                                                   11
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.   Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

5.1.1. Jacobian-based approach


      Jacobian basis procedure
       1. This approach involves solving Eq. 5.1 while collecting the matrices Ji (ũi ; µ j )Φ when convergence is
          achieved (for all training parameters µ).
          First, define the auxiliary matrix:
                  j
                 SJ (µ j ) := J1 (ũ1 ; µ j )Φ, J2 (ũ2 ; µ j )Φ, . . . , JT (ũT ; µ j )Φ .
                             [                                                            ]
                                                                                                               (38)
          Then construct SJ by stacking these matrices:
               SJ = S1J (µ1 ), S2J (µ2 ), . . . , SJP (µ P ) .
                     [                                      ]
                                                                                                                      (39)
       2. Once the matrix has been constructed, the truncated SVD (with relative truncation tolerance ϵΨJ ) is used
          to determine an orthogonal basis matrix:
                 ΨJ , •, • = SVD(SJ , ϵΨJ ).
                [         ]
                                                                                                               (40)



   It is worth noting that although all iterative schemes in this work are presented using the Newton–Raphson
method, the proposed approach is not restricted to this method and can be applied to any iterative scheme, including
those that use fixed-point iteration techniques such as Picard’s method. Therefore, the matrices Ji can be computed
using either the exact Jacobian or an approximate Jacobian.
Observations:
    1. The number of columns of ΨJ is always equal to or greater than the number of columns of Φ:

               ncol(ΨJ ) ≥ ncol(Φ).                                                                                      (41)

       The equality holds in the linear case, i.e., when Jt is constant.
    2. As a corollary, in the general case where ncol(ΨJ ) > ncol(Φ), Eq. (37) becomes an over-determined system
       of nonlinear equations. This implies that the problem of Eq. (37) should be posed as finding ∆ût ∈ Rn such
       that
                                    2
                      1
              min ΨJ Rt (ũt ; µ)  ,
                           T
                                     
                                                                                                             (42)
             ∆ût ∈Rn 2

        which in turn, leads to the stationary condition

               ∂ 12 (ΨJT Rt )T (ΨJT Rt )   1        ∂Rt T T            1               ∂Rt
                                         = (ΨJT          ) (ΨJ Rt ) + (ΨJT Rt )T (ΨJT       )
                        ∂∆ût              2       ∂∆ût               2              ∂∆ût
                                           1                         1                                                   (43)
                                         = (ΨJT Jt Φ)T (ΨJT Rt ) + (ΨJT Rt )T (ΨJT Jt Φ)
                                           2                         2
                                         = (ΨJT Jt Φ)T (ΨJT Rt ) = 0.
        Hence, in this case, the residual adopts the expression

               r′t = ΦT (JtT ΨJ )(ΨJT Rt ) = 0.                                                                          (44)

If we use the standard Newton–Raphson method to solve the preceding equation, obtain the following system of
linear equations at each iteration:
        ∂r′
             p̂t = −r′t ,                                                                                                (45)
       ∂∆ût
                                                              12
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

where the Jacobian matrix of the projected residual r′ is given by
        ∂r′t       ∂JtT                            ∂Rt
             = ΦT       ΨJ ΨJT Rt + ΦT JtT ΨJ ΨJT                                                                            (46)
       ∂∆ût      ∂∆ût                           ∂∆ût
Near the minimum, i.e., when Rt ≈ 0, we can discard the first term on the right-hand side of the above expression,
leading to the approximation
        ∂r′
             ≈ ΦT JtT ΨJ ΨJT Jt Φ,                                                                                           (47)
       ∂∆ût
which results in the following Newton–Raphson iterations: for k = 1, . . . , K , solve
     [                    ]T                                 [                ]T
       J(k)
        t   ( ũ(k)
                t   ; µ)Φ    Ψ J Ψ T (k) (k)
                                    J
                                   J t  (ũt ; µ)Φ p̂(k)
                                                     t   = −   J(k) (k)
                                                                t  (ũt ; µ)Φ    ΨJ ΨJT R(k)  (k)
                                                                                         t (ũt ; µ)

                                               ∆ût(k+1) = ∆û(k)  (k) (k)                                                   (48)
                                                              t + αt p̂t
                                                  ũt(k+1) = ũ(k)     (k+1)
                                                               t + Φ∆ût     .
It should be noted that solving the system of equations above amounts to minimizing the expression
                                                     2
                           µ)Φ                      µ)
            T                        T
                                                      
       min  Ψ
            J  Jt (ũ t ;    p̂t − Ψ J R t ( ũt ;                                                                         (49)
       p̂t ∈Rn
                                                      

at each iteration. This minimization problem can be addressed by using the QR factorization of
       ΨJT Jt Φ ∈ Rm×n .                                                                                                     (50)
Note that although this matrix is still rectangular, it has a much smaller dimension (m ≪ N and n ≪ N ) compared
to the full order model ∈ R N ×N .

Proposition. If ϵΨJ = 0 in the SVD of Eq. (40), then Eq. (44) is equivalent to Eq. (37) for the training parameters.

Proof. Eq. (44) can be written as
       (ΨJ ΨJT Jt Φ)T Rt = 0.                                                                                                (51)
If ϵΨJ = 0 in Eq. (40), then Jt Φ ∈ col(ΨJ ) for the training parameters. This means that, since ΨJ is orthogonal,
ΨJ ΨJT Jt Φ = Jt Φ. Thus, Eq. (40) becomes
       (Jt Φ)T Rt = 0.                                                                                                       (52)
  □

   As the number of modes increases, such as when solving highly nonlinear problems, the size of the snapshots
matrix in Eq. (39) can potentially become quite large. This is because the size of the matrix increases linearly with
the number of modes. This observation highlights the need to explore alternative techniques that can better handle
large, evolving datasets. One such approach is based on residual evolution, which we will discuss in more detail
below.


5.1.2. Residual-based approach
   The orthogonal matrix Ψ introduces an orthogonal decomposition of R N as shown in Eq. (37):
       R N = null(ΨT ) ⊕ col(Ψ).                                                                                             (53)
It is important to note that a converged nodal residual vector will belong to null(ΨT ), while non-converged nodal
residual vectors, will have components in col(Ψ). This observation suggests an alternative approach for determining
the left ROB as a basis matrix for the column space of non-converged residuals. The detailed procedure for this
approach is provided below. See Fig. 2.
                                                                  13
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




                                   Fig. 2. Schematic overview of Petrov–Galerkin PROM construction.




                                                                 14
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298



      Residuals basis procedure
       1. For each training parameter µ j and at each nonlinear iteration k, define the non-converged residual at
          timestep i as:
                  Ri(k) (µ j ) = Ri (ui(k) ; µ j ),                                                                       (54)
          Here, k signifies the kth nonlinear iteration. For every timestep i and each training parameter µ j , gather
          a matrix of snapshots of the non-converged nodal residual vectors associated with the solutions ũi(k) :
                           [                                               ]
                                                                 (K −1)
                Bi (µ j ) = Ri(1) (µ j ), Ri(2) (µ j ), . . . , Ri i (µ j ) ,                                     (55)
          where K i denotes the total amount of non-linear iterations for the ith time step for the corresponding
          parameter µ j .
                                                                                             j
       2. Assemble all the snapshot matrices Bi (µ j ) into a singular snapshot matrix SB (µ j ) for each parameter
          µ j . Specifically, stack the snapshot matrices Bi (µ j ) for all timesteps and the jth parameter µ j into a
          singular matrix representing all non-converged residuals:
                   j
                 SB (µ j ) = B1 (µ j ), B2 (µ j ), . . . , BT (µ j ) .
                             [                                      ]
                                                                                                                  (56)
                                                       j
       3. Compile all the snapshot matrices SB (µ j ) into a final non-converged residuals matrix for all training
          parameters:
               SR = S1B (µ1 ), S2B (µ2 ), . . . , SBP (µ P ) .
                      [                                     ]
                                                                                                              (57)
       4. Obtain the orthogonal basis ΨR :
          Perform a truncated SVD to obtain the orthogonal basis for their column spaces:
                  [ΨR , •, •] = SVD(SR , ϵR ).                                                                            (58)
          It is clear that
                  col(ΨR ) ⊆ col(ΨJ )                                                                                     (59)
          (see Fig. 2 for schematic overview)



   It is worth mentioning that, for highly nonlinear dynamical systems, the number of modes in the right ROB is
expected to be higher than the number of non-linear iterations. This implies that the size of the SR matrix, which is
constructed by gathering non-converged residuals for each parameter, will only increase in proportion to the number
of non-linear iterations and is expected to be smaller than the size of the SJ matrix, which is constructed using the
Jacobian matrix projected onto the left ROB.


5.2. Comparing matrix sizes and computational costs in iterative procedures: The case of rectangular
Petrov–Galerkin approach

   Reduced-order modeling involves iterative procedures, for example, in the Newton–Raphson method, the matrix
size plays a crucial role in determining both the computational cost and the solution approach.
   Let us consider the matrix sizes involved in three different iterative schemes: the FOM, Galerkin ROM, and
Petrov–Galerkin ROM. The FOM system involves a matrix
       Jt ∈ R N ×N ,
where N is the original dimensionality of the system. The Galerkin projection, on the other hand, employs the
matrix
       ΦT Jt Φ ∈ Rn×n ,
                                                                  15
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.   Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

which results in a smaller system (n ≪ N ) that needs to be solved, leading to significant computational savings
during the iterative procedure. It is worth noting that the full order model, Galerkin ROM, and LSPG ROM systems
considered thus far have all been square systems. However, the Petrov–Galerkin projection requires solving a
rectangular system of size

          ΨT Jt Φ ∈ Rm×n ,

where m ≥ n (with O(m) = O(n)), leading to a minimization problem that needs to be addressed. One possible
solution to this problem is QR factorization. Fig. 3 illustrates a schematic representation of the various systems
and their resulting sizes. Additionally, Algorithm 5 presents the invariant left ROB PG-PROM algorithm, which
differs from the general PG-PROM algorithm in Algorithm 2 as the left ROB Ψ is an input rather than an iteration-
dependent variable. This feature brings significant computational savings in the subsequent hyper-reduction stage,
as we will see later on. Despite the increased system size and associated computational cost, the Petrov–Galerkin
projection can provide better accuracy than the Galerkin projection in certain situations.
    Let us examine the computational costs tied to the training and online phases of the Galerkin, LSPG, and Petrov–
Galerkin strategies more closely. Both the Galerkin and LSPG strategies involve a FOM assembly and solution for
parameters P and their respective times T during the training phase. The complexity of the FOM assembly is
O(L), and for the FOM solution, it is O(N k ), with k ≥ 1 depending on the specific iterative solver employed for
the sparse system. Then, a Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) compression is performed with a complexity of
O(N (T P)n) using a randomized SVD. In the subsequent online phase, the FOM assembly is repeated, followed by
a system projection operation, with complexities of O(N0 × n) and O(n 2 × N ) for sparse-dense and dense-dense
matrix multiplication respectively, where N0 represents the non-zero entries. The online phase concludes with a
direct solution of a dense ROM, which is associated with a complexity of O(n 3 ). Conversely, the Petrov–Galerkin
strategy introduces an additional training phase, which involves a repeated FOM assembly, system projection, and
solution of the LSPG ROM for the same parameters P and their corresponding times T . This phase also requires
an additional SVD compression operation, with a complexity of O(N (T P K )n), reflecting the sum of nonlinear
iterations (K ) in a residual-based approach, and once again employing a randomized SVD. Despite these heightened
computational costs, this phase bolsters the HROM scheme by negating the need for a complementary mesh during
the creation of the HROM model. The online phase mirrors that of the Galerkin and LSPG strategies but adjusts
the ROM solution complexity to O(mn 2 ) (with O(m) = O(n)).
Algorithm 5: Newton-Raphson strategy for invariant left ROB PG-PROM.
 1      Input: State variable uref , right ROB Φ, and left ROB Ψ
 2      Output: State variable ũt and increment update ∆ût
                       (0)             (0)
     1: Initialize ∆ût = 0, i.e., ũt = uref
     2: for k = 0, . . . , K (convergence) do
     3:    Evaluate residual R(k)t = Rt |ũ(k)
                                             ⏐t
                                         ∂Rt ⏐
     4:    Evaluate Jacobian J(k) t =           (k)
                                           ∂ ũ ũt
     5:      Compute W(k) = ΨT J(k)     t Φ
     6:      if m ̸= n then
     7:         Compute QR decomposition W(k) = Q(k) D(k)
     8:         Solve D(k) p̂(k)
                               t = −Q
                                          T (k) T (k)
                                               Ψ Rt
      9:     else
     10:        Solve W(k) p̂(k)t = −Ψ Rt
                                           T (k)

     11:     end if
                                                 (k) (k)
     12:     Update ∆ût(k+1) = ∆û(k)   t + αt p̂t
                         (k+1)      (k)         (k+1)
     13:     Update ũt        = ũt + Φ∆ût
     14: end for
                      ∑K          k+1
     15: ∆ût = Φ          k=1 ∆ût
                  (K +1)
     16: ũt = ũt        ≡ uref + ∆ût

                                                              16
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 3. This diagram illustrates the various dimensions of the systems that need to be addressed in different scenarios, as well as their
corresponding projections. The four cases depicted are: (a) a full-order model, (b) a Galerkin-PROM, (c) a LPSG-PROM, and (d) a PG-PROM.




5.3. Hyper-reduction


  The Newton–Raphson iterations for the invariant left ROB Petrov–Galerkin Projection-based Reduced Order
Model with residual-based formulation, aforementioned: for k = 1, . . . , K , we solve the following equations:


        ΨRT J(k)  (k)      (k)   T (k) (k)
             t (ũt ; µ)Φp̂t = −ΨR Rt (ũt ; µ)
                                          (k) (k)
                       ∆û(k+1)
                          t     = ∆û(k)
                                     t + αt p̂t                                                                                     (60)
                          ũ(k+1)
                            t     = ũ(k)     (k+1)
                                      t + Φ∆ût     .
                                                                   17
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

We can highlight the difference between the variant and invariant left ROB approaches by revisiting Eq. (21), which,
when substituted with the residual-based left ROB, gives:
                         L
                         ∑         T
       ΨRT Rt = ΨRT            Le Ret
                         e=1
                 L
                 ∑
               =   (Le ΨR )T Ret                                                                                                     (61)
                   e=1
                   L
                   ∑           T
               =         ΨeR Ret .
                   e=1

    Comparing this to Eq. (33), the main difference in the LSPG assembling in the variant approach is the term
R̄et (Eq. (36)). This term requires determining residual vectors for all elements that share nodes with element e
(i.e., a patch of elements), which leads to the need to store a complementary mesh for the online evaluation of
the LSPG-HPROM. In contrast, the left ROB in the PG-HPROM method is invariant and does not depend on
surrounding elements. Therefore, the hyper-reduction scheme can be efficiently coupled with the ECM algorithm
using an element-by-element construction and optimal mesh sampling.


6. Results

   • Analysis of the nonlinear behavior of a cantilever beam subjected to prescribed forces in structural mechanics,
     with hyperelastic material properties described by the Kirchhoff Saint-Venant model.
   • A transient rotating pulse convection–diffusion problem with convection dominance.
   • Flow past a cylinder benchmark in fluid dynamics.

To evaluate the accuracy of the constructed PROMs and HPROMs, we measure the relative error between the
solution state variables and their corresponding values obtained from the FOM and PROM-based models. At each
ith time-step solution snapshot of the jth parameter configuration, the relative error is calculated as:
                                          2
                                          
                    ũi (µ j ) − ui (µ j )
                                          
       E i (µ j ) =                2        ,                                                          (62)
                                   
                          ui (µ j )
                                   

where ũi (µ j ) ∈ R N and ui (µ j ) ∈ R N are the approximated and reference solutions of the state variable, respectively,
at the ith time step for the jth parameter configuration. We also calculate the relative error for the entire set of
solution snapshots, which is defined as:
                       
                       
             S̃u − Su 
                       
      E=           F,                                                                                                (63)
                  
                  Su 
                  
                         F

where
                                        ...,                            . . . , ũT (µ2 ),   ...,
             [                                                                                                   ]
        S̃u = ũ1 (µ1 ), ũ2 (µ1 ),            ũT (µ1 ), ũ1 (µ2 ),                                ũT (µ P )                       (64)
and
                                        ...,                                        ...,                 ...,
            [                                                                                                                    ]
        Su = u1 (µ1 ), u2 (µ1 ),               uT (µ1 ), u1 (µ2 ), u2 (µ2 ),                 uT (µ2 ),               uT (µ P )       (65)
are the snapshot matrices capturing the solution and approximation state variables across all time steps and parameter
configurations.
                                                                   18
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




                                             Fig. 4. Cantilever beam with two pressure loads.



6.1. Structural mechanics case

   In this research, we analyze the nonlinear behavior of a cantilever beam in the field of structural mechanics, with
the primary objective to compare the performance of Galerkin-PROMs, LSPG-PROMs, and PG-PROMs for systems
governed by SPD operators. Additionally, the Jacobian-based and Residual-based approaches for selecting the left
reduced order basis (ROB) Ψ are compared. The cantilever beam, subjected to prescribed forces, is assumed to
possess hyperelastic material properties, as described by the Kirchhoff Saint-Venant model. The material properties
include a Young’s modulus of 206.9 GPa and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.29. This beam is designed to undergo large
displacements, with the problem being formulated using a Total Lagrangian formulation under √    a plane stress analysis
                                                                                                                    √
setup. Two pressure loads, P1 and P2 , are applied to the system. They are defined as P1 = c1 ∗ α and P2 = c2 ∗ α
respectively, with c1 = 108 Newtons and c2 = 107 Newtons. These loads, directed in negative vertical and horizontal
directions, are presented in Fig. 4. The loads are applied simultaneously with varying intensities over a series of
steps to simulate the nonlinear behavior of the cantilever beam. The model will be trained for α values in the range
of [0.1, 2.0] and tested for extrapolated values of α in the range (2.0, 4.0]. As also depicted in Fig. 4, there is a
fixed displacement imposed on the left boundary. The model for this analysis comprises 6954 finite elements with
3626 nodes, leading to 7252 degrees of freedom. This comprehensive model complexity aims to provide a precise
simulation of the nonlinear behavior of the system under the conditions specified.
Reduction. For this analysis, specific tolerances were set to guide the reduction process. The tolerance used to
determine the dimensionality of the latent variables û, which subsequently defines the number of columns in the
right reduced order basis (ROB) Φ, was set at ϵu = 10−6 . For the Petrov–Galerkin approaches, both Residual-based
and Jacobian-based, the singular value decomposition (SVD) tolerance was established as ϵR = ϵJ = 10−6 . This
tolerance value serves to determine the size of the left ROB Ψ. Lastly, the tolerance for the empirical cubature
method (ECM), used across all projection strategies, was set to machine precision.
Discussion. The numerical investigation led to a latent approximation space Φ of dimension 3 (number of modes)
and a constraint space Ψ of dimension 7 (number of modes). The latter size was consistent in both Petrov–Galerkin
methods, Jacobian-based and Residual-based, highlighting the uniformity in the constraint space selection.
   Analyzing the overall L2 norms in both the training and testing phases, our models have delivered highly
promising results. In the training phase (Table 1), the L2 norms between FOM, ROM, and HROM models were
found to be on the order of 10−6 to 10−8 for both x and y displacements. This corresponds closely to our original
error truncation tolerance set at 10−6 , thereby demonstrating excellent model fidelity in reproducing the training
scenarios. Moreover, both the LSPG and Petrov–Galerkin strategies yielded similarly low L2 norms, reinforcing the
residual-minimum property these methods aim to achieve. This result not only validates our proposed methodologies,
but also highlights the underlying relationship between these projection strategies. In the testing phase (Table 2),
where the models are applied to an extrapolated parametric space, the L2 norms remained low and within the same
order of magnitude as the original error truncation tolerance. This result validates the robustness of our models, as
they maintain a high degree of accuracy even when extrapolated beyond their training data (see Figs. 5 and 6).
   The HROMs selection process resulted in the following distribution of elements: Galerkin strategy yielded 20
elements (0.29% of the total 6954 elements), LSPG strategy yielded 35 elements (0.50% of the total), Petrov–
Galerkin Residual-based strategy selected 68 elements (0.98% of the total), and Petrov–Galerkin Jacobian-based
strategy selected 54 elements (0.78% of the total). It is worth noting that although the LSPG strategy initially
                                                                   19
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

Table 1
Overall L2 norms for training phase.
 Strategy                          Overall L2 Norm (Training)                                                    Variable
                                   FOM vs ROM                  ROM vs HROM               FOM vs HROM
                                   2.125 × 10−8                9.630 × 10−13             2.125 × 10−8            Displacement x
 Galerkin                          4.089 × 10−9                1.060 × 10−12             4.089 × 10−9            Displacement y
                                   1.257 × 10−6                1.251 × 10−9              1.257 × 10−6            Displacement x
 LSPG                              1.136 × 10−6                1.173 × 10−9              1.136 × 10−6            Displacement y
                                   9.731 × 10−7                1.434 × 10−8              9.587 × 10−7            Displacement x
 Petrov–Galerkin Res.              8.826 × 10−7                1.325 × 10−8              8.693 × 10−7            Displacement y
                                   9.060 × 10−7                1.159 × 10−8              8.946 × 10−7            Displacement x
 Petrov–Galerkin Jac.              7.814 × 10−7                1.021 × 10−8              7.712 × 10−7            Displacement y


Table 2
Overall L2 norms for testing phase.
 Strategy                          Overall L2 Norm (Testing)                                                     Variable
                                   FOM vs ROM                  ROM vs HROM               FOM vs HROM
                                   3.331 × 10−7                2.748 × 10−11             3.331 × 10−7            Displacement x
 Galerkin                          6.843 × 10−8                3.326 × 10−11             6.842 × 10−8            Displacement y
                                   2.095 × 10−5                1.230 × 10−8              2.094 × 10−5            Displacement x
 LSPG                              1.968 × 10−5                1.178 × 10−8              1.967 × 10−5            Displacement y
                                   1.618 × 10−5                2.339 × 10−7              1.595 × 10−5            Displacement x
 Petrov–Galerkin Res.              1.528 × 10−5                2.243 × 10−7              1.506 × 10−5            Displacement y
                                   1.508 × 10−5                2.279 × 10−7              1.486 × 10−5            Displacement x
 Petrov–Galerkin Jac.              1.354 × 10−5                2.020 × 10−7              1.334 × 10−5            Displacement y


                                         Table 3
                                         Speedups for ROM and HROM using different strategies.
                                          Strategy                          Total speedup
                                          ROM Galerkin                      9.92
                                          HROM Galerkin                     612.13
                                          ROM LSPG                          13.32
                                          HROM LSPG                         119.85
                                          ROM Petrov-Galerkin Res.          7.70
                                          HROM Petrov-Galerkin Res.         164.70
                                          ROM Petrov-Galerkin Jac.          8.56
                                          HROM Petrov-Galerkin Jac.         228.86



appears to require fewer selected elements than the Petrov–Galerkin strategies, it demands information from the
surrounding elements and thus necessitates a complementary mesh. This increases the effective number of elements
from 35 to 293, as shown in Fig. 7. Consequently, despite the initially smaller selection, LSPG yields a considerably
lower speedup when compared to the other strategies (see Table 3). These results elucidate the significant speedups
achieved when deploying HROM strategies compared to their traditional ROM counterparts.
   Our numerical results highlight that, particularly for problems exhibiting symmetric positive-definite (SPD)
operators like the one studied in this case, the Galerkin approach consistently provides superior results and speed-
ups. However, the reader must not overlook the primary goal of this work, which is to propose an equivalent
projection strategy to LSPG, one that utilizes a fixed left reduced order basis, Ψ, and obviates the necessity of the
complementary mesh.
   Noteworthy is the contrast in the speed-ups achieved: we observe a transition from an LSPG HROM speed-up of
119.85 to a Petrov–Galerkin speed-up of 164.70 for the Residuals-based approach and 228.86 for the Jacobian-based
method. This significant impact in terms of computational efficiency is pronounced even for this relatively simple and
coarse problem. Another important aspect to discuss is the relative effort required to train the HROM models from
                                                                   20
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.          Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 5. Relative L2 Norm between the FOM and ROM against the scaling parameter α. The vertical line at α = 2.0 denotes the boundary
between the training (α ∈ [0.0, 2.0], shaded green) and testing phases (α ∈ (2.0, 4.0], shaded blue). Each line represents a different strategy
used in the model reduction process. The subfigures represent two distinct variables of interest: (a) Displacement in x, and (b) Displacement
in y. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)




Fig. 6. Relative L2 Norm between the FOM and the HROM against the scaling parameter α. The vertical line at α = 2.0 denotes the
boundary between the training (α ∈ [0.0, 2.0], shaded green) and testing phases (α ∈ (2.0, 4.0], shaded blue). Each line represents a different
strategy used in the model reduction process. The subfigures represent two distinct variables of interest: (a) Displacement in x, and (b)
Displacement in y. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)



the FOM. In this specific case, if we consider the effort for training the Galerkin strategy as a reference, we observe
that the LSPG strategy has a slightly higher ratio of 1.01 to the Galerkin, showing a similar efficiency in training
the model. On the other hand, the Petrov–Galerkin strategies present a higher ratio of 1.38. This increase in training
effort for the Petrov–Galerkin strategies originates from the second training phase, which is required to determine
the optimal fixed left ROB Ψ. This underscores the trade-off in computational efficiency when selecting a modeling
strategy. In this case, the reduction in elements needed for the Petrov–Galerkin methods (which eliminates the need
for a complementary mesh, unlike LSPG) comes at the cost of increased computational effort during training.
   Moving forward, the aim is to investigate how these findings extrapolate to problems with finer meshes and
different physics. We believe the strategies presented in this work will be invaluable tools in addressing more
complex, real-world problems in structural mechanics and beyond.


                                                                      21
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 7. Comparison of HROM solutions for different strategies in the context of the cantilever beam: (a) FOM, (b) Galerkin HROM, (c)
LSPG HROM, (d) Petrov–Galerkin HROM. The figure also exhibits the different HROM meshes used for each strategy.



6.2. Convection–diffusion case

   In this study, we solved a 2D convection–diffusion problem on a non-uniform mesh comprising 23204 elements
and 11603 nodes (degrees of freedom). This problem, characterized by a transient rotating pulse, is adapted
from [28]. The transient convection–diffusion equation is expressed as:
       ∂u
          + a · ∇u − ∇ · (ε∇u) = s            in Ω = [0, 1] × [0, 1].                                                          (66)
       ∂t
In this equation, u represents the unknown scalar field, ∂u
                                                         ∂t
                                                            is the rate of change of this field over time, and a · ∇u
is the convective term where a = (−y, x) is the velocity field. The term ∇ · (ε∇u) represents diffusion, and s is the
source term defined as:
           {           (                  )2 )
                                               if x 2 + y 2 < 1,
                                                  √
              10 × exp −50 x 2 + y 2 − 21
                             (
       s=                                                                                                         (67)
              0                                otherwise.
The boundary conditions are set as u = 0 on ∂Ω (the boundary of Ω ), and u = 0 at t = 0.
   This problem is chosen due to its convection-dominant nature. For further details on the problem setup, please
refer to [28].
   The reduced order model was trained using properties of two different materials: Ethylene Glycol and SAE 30
Engine Oil. Ethylene Glycol has a density of approximately 1110 kg/m3 , a thermal conductivity of 0.253 W/(m*K),
and a specific heat of 2412 J/(kg*K). SAE 30 Engine Oil, on the other hand, has a density of approximately
875 kg/m3 , a thermal conductivity of 0.15 W/(m*K), and a specific heat of 2092 J/(kg*K).
   In the testing phase, the reduced order model was extrapolated to a third material, Glycerol. Glycerol has a density
of approximately 1260 kg/m3 , a thermal conductivity of 0.286 W/(m*K), and a specific heat of 2430 J/(kg*K). The
primary goal of this experiment is to assess the ability of the reduced order model to generalize over varying material
parameters. The time for the convection–diffusion problem was defined from 0 to 5 s.
Reduction. The reduction process for the convection–diffusion problem was carried out with a tolerance level of
ϵu = 10−3 , which was used to determine the dimensionality of the latent variables û. Under this tolerance, the
number of modes in the right reduced order basis (ROB) Φ was 18. The Petrov–Galerkin methods, with singular
value decomposition (SVD) tolerances of ϵR = ϵJ = 10−3 , resulted in a left ROB, Ψ, comprising 18 modes for the
                                                                 22
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

             Table 4
             Mean relative L2 norms for the training phase.
              Strategy                           FOM vs ROM                ROM vs HROM                  FOM vs HROM
              Galerkin                           2.323 × 10−3              1.35 × 10−6                  1.089 × 10−3
              LSPG                               2.326 × 10−3              1.399 × 10−5                 1.640 × 10−3
              Petrov–Galerkin Res.               2.180 × 10−3              1.635 × 10−4                 1.267 × 10−3
              Petrov–Galerkin Jac.               2.326 × 10−3              1.335 × 10−6                 1.230 × 10−3




Fig. 8. Relative L2 Norm between the FOM and ROM for different training materials. Each line represents a different strategy used in the
model reduction process. The subfigures represent two distinct materials: (a) Ethylene Glycol, and (b) SAE 30 Engine Oil.



Jacobian-based approach and 19 modes for the Residual-based approach. The empirical cubature method (ECM),
which was utilized in all the projection strategies, was configured with a tolerance of 10−6 .
Discussion. Our model’s initial validation utilized training materials, specifically Ethylene Glycol and SAE 30
Engine Oil. The resultant mean relative L2 errors across different model reduction strategies are encapsulated in
the Table 4.
    In contrast to the structural mechanics case, the Galerkin method, impacted by the non-SPD nature of the problem,
fails to yield a clear minimum solution. Nonetheless, an interesting observation from the results is the convergence
of Petrov–Galerkin strategies and the LSPG method to similar error magnitudes. Illustrating the evolution of the
mean relative L2 error for varying reduction strategies concerning the temperature variable, Figs. 8 and 9 further
highlight the implications of the problem not being SPD.
    Remarkably, the Petrov–Galerkin strategies not only match the LSPG’s error values but also outperform them
within an HROM context further presented. The effectiveness and aptness of the Petrov–Galerkin strategies in
handling such complicated problems are thereby accentuated.
    Delving into the HROM selection process, it yielded the following element distribution: the Galerkin strategy
incorporated 365 elements (representing 1.57% of the total 23204 elements), the LSPG strategy included 358
elements (1.54% of the total), the Petrov–Galerkin Residual-based strategy integrated 462 elements (1.99% of the
total), and the Petrov–Galerkin Jacobian-based strategy adopted 439 elements (1.89% of the total). It is noteworthy
that, despite seemingly requiring fewer elements, the LSPG strategy depends on information from surrounding
elements, necessitating a complementary mesh. The LSPG strategy further results in a marked increase in the
effective number of elements, growing from 358 to 3265, approximately 9.1 times the original selection. This
inflated selection constitutes 14.07% of the original FOM with 23204 elements, a significant increase from the
initial 1.54%, as depicted in Fig. 10.
    In contrast, the Petrov–Galerkin strategies hold an advantage as they prevent this rise in elements while still
providing a solution with a minimum residual comparable to the LSPG strategy.
    Having delved into the complexities of element distribution within different strategies, let us now shift our focus
to another critical metric: the total speedups achieved for the ROMs and HROMs across these strategies. This will
                                                                  23
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 9. Relative L2 Norm between the FOM and the HROM for different training materials. Each line represents a different strategy used
in the model reduction process. The subfigures represent two distinct materials: (a) Ethylene Glycol, and (b) SAE 30 Engine Oil.

                           Table 5
                           Average speedups for ROM and HROM using different strategies, and the percentage
                           of elements selected for HROM with respect to the FOM.
                            Strategy                               Total speedup (average over materials)
                            ROM Galerkin                           4.04
                            HROM Galerkin                          49.0
                            ROM LSPG                               4.33
                            HROM LSPG                              21.35
                            ROM Petrov-Galerkin Res.               3.63
                            HROM Petrov-Galerkin Res.              35.39
                            ROM Petrov-Galerkin Jac.               3.64
                            HROM Petrov-Galerkin Jac.              37.44


             Table 6
             Mean relative L2 norms for the testing phase with glycerol.
              Strategy                           FOM vs ROM                ROM vs HROM                 FOM vs HROM
              Galerkin                           2.324 × 10−3              1.15 × 10−6                 1.090 × 10−3
              LSPG                               2.327 × 10−3              1.41 × 10−5                 1.640 × 10−3
              Petrov–Galerkin Res.               2.167 × 10−3              1.22 × 10−14                1.267 × 10−3
              Petrov–Galerkin Jac.               2.326 × 10−3              6.07 × 10−15                1.231 × 10−3



provide us with another important perspective on the comparative performance of these methods. Table 5 below
encapsulates the total average speedups for the ROM and HROM using different strategies.
   After establishing our model’s performance with the training materials, we expanded our analysis to encompass
a material distinct from the training set, specifically, Glycerol. This rigorous test allows us to evaluate our
model’s ability in predicting the behavior of materials beyond its training repertoire. Delving into the comparative
examination of mean relative L2 norms for different model reduction strategies applied to Glycerol, the Table 6
below encapsulates these findings. It lays out the mean relative L2 norms for the temperature variable. Our
exploration of Glycerol test results underlines the robust performance of our reduced order model across diverse
materials with comparable properties. Figs. 11(a) ans 11(b) visualize the trajectory of the mean relative L2 error
for various reduction strategies in relation to the temperature variable of the test material, Glycerol.
   While the Galerkin strategy for HROM marks high speedup in this non-SPD problem and provides a benchmark,
we must heed the fact that the Galerkin method does not guarantee convergence to the minimum solution for all non-
SPD problems. Consequently, it could potentially induce instabilities [19]. Despite its commendable performance in
the given context, its reliability may falter in other scenarios. Our prime interest lies in comparing and contrasting the
LSPG strategy with the Petrov–Galerkin strategies. At first glance, the LSPG strategy may appear more resourceful
                                                                  24
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 10. Comparison of HROM solutions for different strategies in the context of the transient rotating pulse (Ethylene Glycol): (a) FOM,
(b) Galerkin HROM, (c) LSPG HROM, (d) Petrov–Galerkin HROM. The figure also exhibits the different HROM meshes used for each
strategy.



due to its more economical selection of elements from the FOM. However, its need for a larger effective selection
driven by the necessary complementary mesh eventually cuts into its computational speedup.
   Conversely, the Petrov–Galerkin strategies deliver substantial speedups while harnessing a relatively lean fraction
of FOM elements. Impressively, these strategies achieve a solution fidelity comparable to the LSPG method but boast
superior computational efficiency. This performance delineates a desirable balance between computational speedup
and approximation accuracy, thereby hinting at the potential edge of Petrov–Galerkin strategies in non-SPD problem
settings.

6.3. Fluid dynamics case

   The 2D CFD simulation for the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations was performed to solve the well-known
flow past a cylinder benchmark for specific base velocities. The problem geometry consists of a 5 × 2 m channel
with a non-slip cylinder of 0.2 m diameter located at coordinates (1.25,0.5). The top and bottom walls are also
non-slip, and the pressure is fixed along the right edge. The time-dependent parabolic inlet function is applied at
                                                                   25
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.          Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 11. Relative L2 Norm between the FOM and ROM or HROM for the testing material Glycerol. Each line represents a different strategy
used in the model reduction process.

                                                       Table 7
                                                       The calculated Reynolds num-
                                                       bers for each base velocity. The
                                                       test scenario (vb = 5.0 ms ) is
                                                       shaded in gray.
                                                        vb ( ms )        Re
                                                        4.0              66.7
                                                        5.0               83.3
                                                        6.0              100



the left edge, with a sinusoidal ramp-up applied to the inlet function from 0.0 to 1.0 s. This inlet function is defined
as:
              {
                vb y(1 − y)sin( π2t ), t ∈ [0, 1)
       v(t) =
                vb y(1 − y),           t ∈ [1, T ]
   For the monitoring of the results, a probe is positioned downstream from the cylinder’s trailing edge at coordinates
(1.43, 0.52). This probe serves to gather key data from the flow dynamics.
   The simulations are run with base velocities (vb ) of 4.0 ms and 6.0 ms for a total of 30 s for the training phase,
and with a base velocity of 5.0 ms for 40 s during the testing phase. These base velocities correspond to different
Reynolds numbers, calculated using the formula:
               vavg ∗ ρ ∗ D
       Re =                 ,
                     η
where η = 0.002 mkgs is the dynamic viscosity, ρ = 1 mkg3 is the fluid density, D = 0.2 m is the diameter of the
cylinder, and vavg is the average velocity, calculated as v6b . The calculated Reynolds numbers for each base velocity
are presented in Table 7.
   The time step is 0.1 s, and the mesh consists of 68298 linear triangular elements with 34149 nodes (102447
degrees of freedom). Fig. 12 illustrates the problem setup and boundary conditions. By simulating this benchmark,
we aim to evaluate the ability of our reduced-order models to reconstruct the flow behavior at different Reynolds
numbers, derived from various base velocities.
Reduction. In this specific analysis, tolerance levels were carefully selected to obtain a sufficiently good approxima-
tion of the fluid-dynamics problem at hand, to avoid introducing high phase and amplitude errors. A tolerance level
of ϵu = 10−4 was adopted to ascertain the dimensionality of the latent variables û. This resulted in the construction
of a right ROB Φ that incorporated 98 modes. For the Petrov–Galerkin approach, particularly the Residual-based
method, a SVD tolerance of ϵR = 5 × 10−4 was employed to prevent the left ROB from becoming excessively
                                                                     26
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.          Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




                                                       Fig. 12. Flow past a cylinder 2D.



large, and yielded a left ROB Ψ consisting of 153 modes. For the left ROB, only the Residual-based approach was
employed in this case to minimize the memory load during the second training phase. This decision was strategic,
as the Jacobian-based method would have resulted in a snapshots matrix for the left ROB growing linearly with the
number of modes in the right ROB. In contrast, the Residual-based approach’s snapshots matrix expands linearly
with the number of nonlinear iterations, which are significantly fewer in this case than the number of modes. This
strategy facilitated a more efficient training process without sacrificing the accuracy of the results. The empirical
cubature method (ECM), deployed across all projection strategies, was configured with a tolerance of 10−5 .
Discussion. With the objective of appraising the resilience and accuracy of our training model, we embarked on a
validation study, employing the training parameters vb of 4.0 ms (Re = 66.7) and 6.0 ms (Re = 100). These specific
values were judiciously selected to encompass a varied, yet illustrative range of the prospective parameter space
wherein the model would be anticipated to perform.
    In this context, it is important to highlight certain aspects of the outcome that stem directly from the unique
properties of the boundary conditions (e.g. the inlet ramp-up) and parametric settings for this case. Given the
complexity of the problem, the model did not showcase a substantial reduction in the information required for
an accurate representation. Specifically, out of 600 snapshots collected for the training set, the optimal right ROB
required 98 modes to accurately represent both the phase and amplitude of the dynamics, devoid of high spikes and
significant errors. This translates into the need for roughly one-sixth of the total information of the problem. While
such a requirement may lead to potential limitations in the performance of both the ROM and the HROM, it is
pivotal to note that these outcomes do not undermine the value of our research. Rather, they provide an opportunity
to gain insights into the nature of complex systems.
    Moreover, the primary intention of this paper is not focused on achieving the highest efficiency of information
reduction, but rather on demonstrating and accentuating the performance of the proposed Petrov–Galerkin HROM in
comparison to the LSPG approach for a general case. Even under less-than-optimal circumstances, our findings shed
valuable light on the versatility and potential of the proposed HROM framework. One important aspect to highlight
is the relative performance of the different reduced order models. Throughout the simulation, it was observed that
both the LSPG and Petrov–Galerkin cases consistently presented results more closely aligned with those of the FOM,
compared to the Galerkin ROM. This outcome underscores the superior performance of the Petrov–Galerkin and
LSPG models in replicating the detailed fluid dynamics captured by the FOM, even under vortical flow conditions.
    Furthermore, it is noteworthy that as the size of the left ROB is increased for the Petrov–Galerkin model, its
outcomes should progressively align with those of the LSPG model. In other words, with a sufficiently large left
ROB, the Petrov–Galerkin model would essentially replicate the LSPG results, underlining the inherent congruence
between these two ROM methodologies when deployed with adequate basis sets. This characteristic reinforces
their capability for delivering reliable and precise simulations, consistent with the FOM, for a wide range of fluid
dynamics problems. The outcomes of these comparisons are visually represented in Figs. 13(a), 13(b), 14(a), and
14(b).
    The HROM selection process yielded the following element distribution: the Galerkin strategy incorporated 6216
elements (representing about 9.10% of the total 68298 elements in the FOM), the LSPG strategy included 5914
elements (8.66% of the total), and the Petrov–Galerkin strategy integrated 5829 elements (about 8.53% of the total).
Though the LSPG strategy seems to require fewer elements, it leverages information from surrounding elements,
hence necessitating more elements in a complementary mesh. Consequently, the effective number of elements
                                                                      27
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 13. Velocity profiles at a selected probe node for the FOM and HROM using Galerkin, LSPG, and Petrov–Galerkin strategies. The
velocities correspond to a Reynolds number of 66.7 (vb = 4.0 ms ) and represent a training parameter. Zoomed-in regions are provided to
visualize specific details.




Fig. 14. Velocity profiles at a selected probe node for the FOM and HROM using Galerkin, LSPG, and Petrov–Galerkin strategies. The
velocities correspond to a Reynolds number of 100 (vb = 6.0 ms ) and represent a training parameter. Zoomed-in regions are provided to
visualize specific details.



expands from 5914 to 32838, about 5.55 times the original selection, constituting 48.07% of the original FOM.
This surge represents a substantial increase from the initial 8.66%, as depicted in Fig. 15. In contrast, the Petrov–
Galerkin strategies avert this surge in elements while still providing a solution with a minimum residual comparable
to the LSPG strategy.
   With a comprehensive understanding of the element distribution across different strategies, it is equally important
to delve into another significant performance metric: the total speedups achieved for the HROM across these
strategies. This analysis will provide us with a valuable perspective on the comparative efficiency of these methods.
Table 8 encapsulates the total speedups for the HROM using different strategies.
   The speedups depicted in Table 8 attest to the efficiency and effectiveness of these strategies within an HROM
context. Notably, the Petrov–Galerkin strategy outperforms the LSPG strategy in terms of speedup, despite delivering
comparable results. This improved efficiency can be attributed to Petrov–Galerkin’s ability to bypass the need for
a complementary mesh, offering significant advantages when selecting an optimal strategy for problems exhibiting
non-SPD operators.
   To further assess the performance of our model, we conducted additional tests for a different inflow velocity of
vb = 5.0 ms , corresponding to a Reynolds number of 83.3. This lies between the two training Reynolds numbers,
                                                                  28
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 15. Comparison of HROM solutions for different strategies in the context of the transient flow past a cylinder (vb = 6.0 ms ): (a) FOM,
(b) Galerkin HROM, (c) LSPG HROM, (d) Petrov–Galerkin HROM. The figure also showcases the different HROM meshes used for each
strategy.

                                                Table 8
                                                Total speedups for HROM using different
                                                strategies.
                                                 Strategy              Total speedup
                                                 HROM Galerkin         3.29
                                                 HROM LSPG             1.81
                                                 HROM Petrov-Galerkin 3.15



allowing us to examine the capability of our model to interpolate for a Reynolds number not explicitly included in
the training set. Additionally, we tested the ability of our model to extrapolate in time for another 10 s, reaching up
to 40 s instead of the 30 s it was trained on. This evaluation is critical to determining the robustness and adaptability
of our model to predict future states beyond its training horizon. The results of these tests are visually represented
in Figs. 16(a) and 16(b).
   The figures reveal that the LSPG and Petrov–Galerkin strategies more accurately reproduce the phase and
amplitude of the FOM. In contrast, the Galerkin strategy takes more time to reach the fully developed flow, shows
higher amplitude errors, and experiences a noticeable phase shift. This underscores the effectiveness of the LSPG and
Petrov–Galerkin strategies in accurately capturing the system dynamics, even under interpolation and extrapolation
scenarios.

7. Conclusions

   In this study, we have proposed an innovative approach that blends two key components: an invariant left ROB
Ψ and its natural integration with the ECM hyper-reduction method. Crucially, our framework allows the left ROB
to be different from the right ROB, providing enhanced flexibility in the hyper-reduction of nonlinear methods.
Our model demonstrated significant improvements in accuracy, particularly for problems with non-SPD operators.
Additionally, it exhibited remarkable efficiency in generating hyper-reduced models for PG-PROMs while preserving
the minimum-residual optimality offered by LSPG projection. In the diverse range of problems studied, including
structural mechanics (SPD), convection–diffusion (non-SPD), and fluid dynamics (non-SPD), our model showcased
robust performance. A noteworthy aspect of our findings was the comparable performance of Petrov–Galerkin
strategies to LSPG, despite the former exhibiting superior computational speedups. Petrov–Galerkin strategies also
                                                                    29
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298




Fig. 16. Velocity profiles at a selected probe node for the FOM and HROM using Galerkin, LSPG, and Petrov–Galerkin strategies. The
velocities correspond to a Reynolds number of 83.3 (vb = 5.0 ms ) and represent a testing parameter. Zoomed-in regions are provided to
visualize specific details. The vertical dashed gray line indicates the edge of the training horizon (time = 30 s).



managed to bypass the surge in the requirement of elements, a limitation observed in the LSPG approach due to the
need for a complementary mesh. Although the introduction of our proposed PG-HPROM necessitates an additional
offline training stage, its efficiency in terms of the number of selected elements equals that of Galerkin HPROMs,
eliminating the need for a complementary mesh. Importantly, the model’s robustness was further reinforced through
validation studies, demonstrating its ability to accurately interpolate and extrapolate under conditions and timelines
not explicitly included in the training set. Given these results, our approach signifies broad applicability in complex
industrial models across various fields, such as structural mechanics, convection–diffusion, and fluid dynamics,
especially for problems with non-SPD Jacobians. This research represents a substantial stride in the field of hyper-
reduction for nonlinear methods, indicating promising potential for further improvements in computational efficiency
and model fidelity in the realm of reduced-order modeling. As an expansion, our methodology could further leverage
advancements in local bases and neural networks, suggesting exciting avenues for future exploration and application.


Declaration of competing interest

   The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Data availability

   Data will be made available on request


Acknowledgments

   The authors acknowledge financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through
the “Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D” (CEX2018-000797-S)”. We acknowledge
financial support from the Generalitat de Catalunya through the FI SDUR-2021 grant, which provided funding
for the predoctoral training of Sebastian Ares de Parga Regalado. This project has received funding from
the European High-Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (JU) under grant agreement Nos 955558 and
956104. The JU receives support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
and from Spain, Germany, France, Italy, Poland, Switzerland, and Norway. Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation (MICINN) supports the project through the project PCI2021-121945. This publication is part of the
R&D project PCI2021-121944, financed by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by the “European Union
NextGenerationEU/PRTR”.
                                                                 30
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.         Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

Appendix. Singular value decomposition
  This appendix provides details on the singular value decomposition (SVD) method used to find a basis matrix
Φ that satisfies the conditions presented in the main text. The procedure involves computing a truncated SVD [23]
(TSVD) of the matrix Au , which is the matrix to be decomposed, with a given relative tolerance 0 < ϵu ≤ 1. The
TSVD function is defined symbolically as follows:
       [U, Σ, V] = SVD(Au , ϵu ),                                                                                                       (68)
                n×r                                                       r ×r
where U ∈ R    is the matrix of left singular vectors, Σ ∈ R   is the matrix of positive singular values (diagonal),
and V ∈ Rm×r is the matrix of right singular vectors. These matrices satisfy the following relationships:
       A = UΣVT + E,               ∥E∥ F ≤ ϵ∥A∥ F ,           UT U = VT V = Ir ×r ,            Σ(i+1,i+1) ≥ Σ(i,i) > 0,                 (69)
where ∥ · ∥ F denotes the Frobenius norm, E is the truncation error, and Σ (i, i) denotes the ith largest singular value
of Au . The basis matrix Φ is then chosen as the matrix of the first n columns of U:
       Au = Un Σn VnT + E,                                                                                                              (70)
           
                Φ
where Un and Vn are the first n columns of U and V, respectively, and Σn is the n × n diagonal matrix containing
the n largest singular values of Au .

References
 [1] L. Sirovich, Turbulence and the dynamics of coherent structures. I. Coherent structures, Quart. Appl. Math. 45 (1987).
 [2] S. Balachandar, Turbulence, coherent structures, dynamical systems and symmetry, AIAA J. 36 (1998).
 [3] A.C. Antoulas, An overview of approximation methods for large-scale dynamical systems, Annu. Rev. Control 29 (2005).
 [4] N.N. Cuong, K. Veroy, A.T. Patera, Certified real-time solution of parametrized partial differential equations, Handbook of Materials
     Modeling, 2005.
 [5] C.W. Rowley, T. Colonius, R.M. Murray, Model reduction for compressible flows using POD and Galerkin projection, Physica D 189
     (2004).
 [6] P. Benner, S. Gugercin, K. Willcox, A survey of projection-based model reduction methods for parametric dynamical systems, SIAM
     Rev. 57 (2015).
 [7] K. Carlberg, C. Bou-Mosleh, C. Farhat, Efficient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares Petrov-Galerkin projection and
     compressive tensor approximations, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 86 (2011).
 [8] R. Everson, L. Sirovich, Karhunen–Loève procedure for gappy data, J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A 12 (1995).
 [9] S. Chaturantabut, D.C. Sorensen, Nonlinear model reduction via discrete empirical interpolation, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 32 (2010).
[10] D. Galbally, K. Fidkowski, K. Willcox, O. Ghattas, Non-linear model reduction for uncertainty quantification in large-scale inverse
     problems, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 81 (2010).
[11] D. Ryckelynck, A priori hyperreduction method: An adaptive approach, J. Comput. Phys. 202 (2005).
[12] K. Carlberg, C. Farhat, J. Cortial, D. Amsallem, The GNAT method for nonlinear model reduction: Effective implementation and
     application to computational fluid dynamics and turbulent flows, J. Comput. Phys. 242 (2013).
[13] C. Farhat, T. Chapman, P. Avery, Structure-preserving, stability, and accuracy properties of the energy-conserving sampling and weighting
     method for the hyper reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 102 (2015).
[14] J.A. Hernández, M.A. Caicedo, A. Ferrer, Dimensional hyper-reduction of nonlinear finite element models via empirical cubature,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 313 (2017).
[15] J.A. Hernández, A multiscale method for periodic structures using domain decomposition and ECM-hyperreduction, Comput. Methods
     Appl. Mech. Engrg. 368 (2020).
[16] M. Barrault, Y. Maday, N.C. Nguyen, A.T. Patera, An ‘empirical interpolation’ method: application to efficient reduced-basis
     discretization of partial differential equations, C. R. Math. 339 (2004).
[17] C. Farhat, P. Avery, T. Chapman, J. Cortial, Dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models with finite rotations
     and energy-based mesh sampling and weighting for computational efficiency, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 98 (2014).
[18] D. Amsallem, M.J. Zahr, C. Farhat, Nonlinear model order reduction based on local reduced-order bases, Internat. J. Numer. Methods
     Engrg. 92 (2012).
[19] K. Carlberg, M. Barone, H. Antil, Galerkin v. least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projection in nonlinear model reduction, J. Comput. Phys.
     330 (2017).
[20] S. Grimberg, C. Farhat, R. Tezaur, C. Bou-Mosleh, Mesh sampling and weighting for the hyperreduction of nonlinear Petrov–Galerkin
     reduced-order models with local reduced-order bases, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 122 (2021).
[21] P.J. Blonigan, K.T. Carlberg, F. Rizzi, M. Howard, J.A. Fike, Model reduction for hypersonic aerodynamics via conservative lspg
     projection and hyper-reduction, in: AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum, 2020.
[22] Y.S. Shimizu, E.J. Parish, Windowed space–time least-squares Petrov–Galerkin model order reduction for nonlinear dynamical systems,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 386 (2021).
                                                                     31
S. Ares de Parga, J.R. Bravo, J.A. Hernández et al.      Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 416 (2023) 116298

[23] C. Eckart, G. Young, The approximation of one matrix by another of lower rank, Psychometrika 1 (1936).
[24] M.J. Zahr, Adaptive Model Reduction to Accelerate Optimization Problems Governed by Partial Differential Equations (Ph.D. thesis),
     Stanford University, 2016.
[25] Y. Saad, Iterative methods for sparse linear systems, second ed., Methods (2003).
[26] S.S. An, T. Kim, D.L. James, Optimizing cubature for efficient integration of subspace deformations, ACM Trans. Graph. 27 (2008).
[27] F. Fang, C.C. Pain, I.M. Navon, A.H. Elsheikh, J. Du, D. Xiao, Non-linear Petrov-Galerkin methods for reduced order hyperbolic
     equations and discontinuous finite element methods, J. Comput. Phys. 234 (2013).
[28] A.H.J. Donea, Finite Element Methods for Flow Problems, 2003.




                                                                  32
