Received: 16 December 2021     Revised: 21 February 2022   Accepted: 21 February 2022

DOI: 10.1002/nme.6957


RESEARCH ARTICLE




A mechanics-informed artificial neural network approach
in data-driven constitutive modeling

Faisal As’ad1                Philip Avery1                 Charbel Farhat1,2,3

1
  Department of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Stanford University,                 Abstract
Stanford, California, USA                          A mechanics-informed artificial neural network approach for learning consti-
2
  Institute for Computational and                  tutive laws governing complex, nonlinear, elastic materials from strain–stress
Mathematical Engineering, Stanford
                                                   data is proposed. The approach features a robust and accurate method for train-
University, Stanford, California, USA
3
 Department of Mechanical Engineering,
                                                   ing a regression-based model capable of capturing highly nonlinear strain–stress
Stanford University, Stanford, California,         mappings, while preserving some fundamental principles of solid mechanics. In
USA                                                this sense, it is a structure-preserving approach for constructing a data-driven
Correspondence                                     model featuring both the form-agnostic advantage of purely phenomenologi-
Faisal As’ad, Department of Aeronautics            cal data-driven regressions and the physical soundness of mechanistic models.
and Astronautics, Stanford University,
                                                   The proposed methodology enforces desirable mathematical properties on the
Durand Building, Room 224, Stanford,
CA 94305-3035, USA.                                network architecture to guarantee the satisfaction of physical constraints such
Email: faisal3@stanford.edu                        as objectivity, consistency (preservation of rigid body modes), dynamic stabil-
                                                   ity, and material stability, which are important for successfully exploiting the
Funding information
Air Force Office of Scientific Research,           resulting model in numerical simulations. Indeed, embedding such notions in a
Grant/Award Number: FA9550-20-1-0358;              learning approach reduces a model’s sensitivity to noise and promotes its robust-
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, Grant/Award Number:
                                                   ness to inputs outside the training domain. The merits of the proposed learning
80NSSC21K0228; National Science                    approach are highlighted using several finite element analysis examples. Its
Foundation, Grant/Award Number:                    potential for ensuring the computational tractability of multi-scale applications
1937129
                                                   is demonstrated with the acceleration of the nonlinear, dynamic, multi-scale,
                                                   fluid-structure simulation of the supersonic inflation dynamics of a parachute
                                                   system with a canopy made of a woven fabric.

                                                   KEYWORDS
                                                   artificial neural network, constitutive modeling, convexity, hyperelasticity, machine learning,
                                                   stability, supersonic parachute inflation dynamics




1        I N T RO DU CT ION

The constitutive modeling of a complex material exhibiting a highly nonlinear behavior can be a difficult task. Two main
approaches for obtaining strain–stress relationships are available for this purpose: phenomenological modeling based
on empirical observations;1,2 and mechanistic models derived from first principles based on the material’s underlying
structure.3 Phenomenological models are appealing (and perhaps even necessary) in the context of highly heterogeneous
materials with complex or even ambiguous micro-structures. However, they are subject to the typical shortcomings of
empirical relationships. Namely, they can violate some fundamental principles that govern the material they describe

2738     © 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                           wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/nme           Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2022;123:2738–2759.
                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                              2739



and typically require a heuristic choice of a parameterized function whose parameters are fitted. Furthermore, they can
be sensitive to data sparsity or noise and become overfitted. While mechanistic models avoid these problems, they are
typically formulated on a material-by-material basis and their derivations can be infeasible for moderately complex mate-
rials. Hence, they cannot necessarily be constructed using a single, comprehensive, modeling framework. Consequently,
a general framework for the mechanics-informed learning of a constitutive law from data that retains the advantages of
both the phenomenological and mechanistic approaches is desirable. This article, which is based on the earlier conference
paper,4 presents such a framework, in the context of complex, highly nonlinear, elastic materials.
    The data-driven aspect of a desired model motivates the use of artificial neural networks (ANNs). Indeed, such net-
works have excellent nonlinear function fitting capabilities, while remaining form-agnostic, which makes them suitable
if not attractive for a general strain–stress modeling framework. Once trained, ANNs have a rapid online execution time:
this is particularly beneficial in the context of an explicit finite element (FE) simulation where the evaluation of a consti-
tutive law can dominate the simulation cost. Moreover, the current availability of automatic differentiation in machine
learning packages and its efficiency in the context of ANNs trivializes the task of obtaining a tangent modulus matrix—for
example, for implicit dynamic computations. For these reasons, regression-based ANNs have been explored for con-
stitutive modeling as early as in References 5 and 6 and exhibited strong promise. They have been applied to model
kinematic hardening7 and to generate implicit models for material viscoplasticity.8 In the absence of paired strain–stress
training data, ANN frameworks have also been proposed for learning constitutive relations from indirect observations.9
Recently, they have gained popularity in the literature for accelerating the homogenization of nonlinear, multi-scale FE
computations.10-13
    In the context of numerical simulations such as those based on FE computational models, purely regression-based
constitutive models—for example, models based on regression ANNs or piece-wise linear interpolation of tabulated
data—often create numerical problems.14 In particular, they can lead to various types of numerical instabilities and
spurious phenomena, despite fitting well to the available data. Consequently, the main purpose of this article is to
present a general framework for constructing a computationally affordable, data-driven, and yet structure-preserving
ANN-based elastic constitutive model by embedding into it a priori a knowledge of some fundamental concepts in
mechanics. Noteworthy related efforts recently published in the literature include References 15-17—which was pub-
lished online at the same time as this article was accepted–as well as the earlier version of this work that appeared in
Reference 4.
    To this end and as stated above, the context is set in this article, to that of elastic materials whose behavior does not
depend on history variables. Hence, for such materials, the training data may exclusively take the form of strain–stress
data pairs to make it equally compatible with numerical and experimental data.
    A second purpose of this article is to highlight the potential of the proposed general framework for data-driven mod-
eling for ensuring the computational tractability of nonlinear multi-scale computations. To this end, the article also
reports on its application to the acceleration of the multi-scale, dynamic, fluid-structure interaction (FSI) analysis of the
supersonic inflation of a parachute system whose canopy is made of a woven fabric. Specifically, acceleration is demon-
strated through the construction of a data-driven mapping between the Green–Lagrange strain predicted by a macro-scale
FE model and its conjugate, the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor predicted through homogenization applied to a
counterpart micro-scale FE model.13
    The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces regression-based ANNs for the data-driven
modeling of constitutive laws. Section 3 identifies fundamental mechanics knowledge that a regression ANN for
data-driven constitutive modeling should be aware of and how to embed such knowledge into an ANN. Section 4 high-
lights first the various merits of the proposed mechanics-informed approach for building ANNs for the data-driven
constitutive modeling of complex, nonlinear, elastic materials using a series of FE-based applications. Then, it demon-
strates the potential of this approach for accelerating nonlinear, dynamic, multi-scale computations by reporting on its
application to a supersonic parachute inflation dynamics (PID) simulation. Finally, Section 5 summarizes in the form of
conclusions the most important findings of this work.


2    REPRESENTAT ION O F A NONLINEAR ELASTIC LAW
BY A REG R E SSION AN N

Again, the scope of this article is set to that of a nonlinear elastic constitutive law—that is, a tensor-valued function
mapping a state of strain to a state of stress. Let E ∈ Sym3 (R) and S ∈ Sym3 (R) denote the Green–Lagrange strain tensor
                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2740                                                                                                              AS’AD et al.



and second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor, respectively. Due to the symmetry of these tensors, a constitutive mapping can
be formulated between their vectorized upper-triangular (or equivalently, lower-triangular) parts designated here by hats.
Explicitly, the mapping can be written using the Voigt notation as
                                                             ( )
                                                          ̂   ̂ ,
                                                          S=G E

                           [                                   ]       [                                ]T
where G ∶ R6 → R6 , E  ̂ = E11 E22 E33 2E23 2E13 2E12 T , ̂        S = S11 S22 S33 S23 S13 S12 , and the super-
script T designates the transpose.
    The objective of a direct regression ANN is to approximate G as  𝜃 using available training data, where
    ⋃Nl ( (l) (l) )
𝜃= l=1  , b         denotes the set of N𝜃 matrix-valued and vector-valued parameters of the ANN organized in Nl fully
connected sequential layers. For simplicity, but without any loss of generality, it is assumed here that a single nonlinear
activation function 𝜙 ∶ R → R is used in the network. In this case, the forward pass of a fully connected ANN takes the
form given in Algorithm 1.


Algorithm 1. Forward pass of a fully connected sequential ANN

Input: x (0) ; Output: y
 1: for l = 1, … , Nl − 1 do
                   (                   )
 2:     x (l) = 𝜙  (l) x (l−1) + b(l)
 3: end for
 4: y =  (Nl ) x (Nl −1) + b(Nl )



                                                            {( (m) (m) )}Nm
       Assuming that a set of Nm strain–stress data pairs     ̂ ,̂
                                                              E   S         is available for training, the ANN parameters
                                                                          m=1
are typically determined by minimizing a squared error loss function. In this case, this can be written as

                                                      Nm d (  ( (m) )       )2
                                                      ∑ ∑
                                           𝜃 = argmin          ̂
                                                            𝛽 E      −̂
                                                                       Sk(m) ,                                            (1)
                                                𝛽∈RN𝜃 m=1 k=1             k


where †k denotes the kth entry of the vector † and d denotes the dimensionality of the vectorized stress tensor (in general,
d = 6 for a solid but can be reduced in some cases). However, the above loss function is not necessarily appropriate
when different stress components vary significantly in magnitude, as is commonly the case for a large class of anisotropic
materials. This is because in this case, some stress components may dominate the solution of the minimization problem
implied in (1), which may lead to the deterioration of the model’s accuracy for predicting the smaller magnitude stress
components. This issue can be remedied by scaling each component of the loss function by the component-wise standard
deviation of the training stress data—that is, by rewriting (1) as

                                                                ( (m) )             2
                                                              ⎛
                                                      Nm d  𝛽 E ̂         Sk(m) ⎞⎟
                                                                          −̂
                                                      ∑  ∑⎜             k
                                           𝜃 = argmin         ⎜                   ⎟,                                      (2)
                                                𝛽∈R 𝜃 m=1 k=1 ⎜
                                                   N               𝜎 k            ⎟
                                                              ⎝                   ⎠

where 𝜎k denotes the standard deviation of the kth component of the training stress data. In general, the loss func-
tion is minimized using a stochastic gradient descent algorithm, where the gradients with respect to each of the ANN’s
parameters are obtained exactly through automatic differentiation.
Remark 1. The scope of this work covers both numerical and experimental data. In the case of numerical data, the
main application is the construction of a reliable, data-driven surrogate constitutive model as in nonlinear computational
homogenization frameworks based on the concept of a locally attached micro-structure (see, e.g., Section 4). In the case
of experimental data, expressions (1) and (2) call for the following clarification. In general, strains and forces are mea-
sured during an experiment. For membrane and (thin) plate or shell coupons, stress resultants can be derived from force
                                                                                                                                    10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                                 2741



measurements, the quantities ̂ Sk(m) appearing in (1) and (2) can be interpreted as vectorized second Piola–Kirchhoff stress
resultants, and therefore the training of the ANN can be performed using strain–{stress resultant} data pairs. For solid
coupons, expressions (1) and (2) implicitly assume that the training vectorized second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses ̂ Sk(m) have
been derived by either the experimentalist or the analyst using a preferred approach—for example, in the case of a uni-
axial coupon test, by converting first the measured forces to area-averaged Cauchy stresses and transforming the latter
stresses to vectorized second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses.


3        MECHANICS-BA SED MODEL CONSTRAINTS

When its size is allowed to grow, the ANN defined by (2) can fit well, in the least squares sense, to data from materials
governed by complicated nonlinear elastic laws. However, being a phenomenological model, it can violate fundamen-
tal principles in mechanics and therefore may not be generally exploitable in the context of numerical simulations.
This can be due to imperfect training, noisy training data, or overfitting. The issue is exacerbated by the lack of
interpretability of ANNs,18 which makes it difficult to judge the physical soundness of the model parameters after
training. Consequently, it is desirable to enforce mechanics-based constraints in the construction of a data-driven con-
stitutive law. Furthermore, embedding a priori a knowledge of mechanics in a data-driven model can be expected
to favor learning the structure of a constitutive relation rather than overfitting the training data: hence, it can be
expected to reduce the model’s sensitivity to noise and promote its robustness to inputs outside the training domain.
In this sense, mechanics-based constraints can be expected to act as a form of regularization. To this end, this section
identifies and discusses four mechanics-based constraints that are important to a regression-based constitutive law.
It also proposes methods for enforcing such constraints in the representation of a nonlinear elastic law by a regres-
sion ANN. The constraints and associated enforcement methods are conceived to be complementary in the sense
that the formulation and enforcement of one of them does not compromise the formulation and/or enforcement of
another one.


3.1            Dynamic stability

The definition of the dynamic stability of a mechanical system varies widely in the literature. Here, it is defined as the
ability of a system to always maintain finite kinetic energy when finite work is performed on it.
Theorem 1. A body described by an elastic material law is dynamically stable if and only if it is hyperelastic—that is,

                                                                 𝜕W
                                                        S(E) =      (E)                                                      (3)
                                                                 𝜕E

for some W ∶ Sym3 (R) → R, which represents the strain energy density of the body.
Proof. The proof presented below is inspired by Carroll,19 which itself draws on observations originally made by R.S.
Rivlin.20 Assume that all processes considered here are isothermal and for the sake of simplicity, assume also that
all traction and body force densities are time-independent when defined in the reference configuration. Consider
a body whose reference configuration is denoted by Ω, let Γ = 𝜕Ω denote its boundary, and let (•)t designate the
configuration-dependent quantity (•) defined in the deformed configuration at time t. Then, the rate of change of the
total kinetic energy of the body is given by

                                 dK             dE
                                    (t) = − S ∶    dΩ +    t ⋅ u̇ dΓt +    𝜌 b ⋅ u̇ dΩt ,                                    (4)
                                 dt        ∫Ω   dt      ∫Γt t           ∫Ωt t

where t is the traction; b is the body force density; 𝜌 is the material density; u is the deformation state; the dot designates
the time derivative; and the symbol ∶ designates the double contraction operation between two tensors, performed by
contracting the last two indices of the first tensor with the first two indices of the second one. In order to pull all integrals
back into the reference configuration, it is first noted that

                                           tt dΓt = dft = Ft df = Ft F−1
                                                                      t t dΓ = t dΓ
                                                                                                                                                                           10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2742                                                                                                                                                        AS’AD et al.



and

                                                                  𝜌t dΩt = 𝜌t det(Ft ) dΩ = 𝜌 dΩ,

where F denotes the deformation gradient and f denotes the force vector. Hence, (4) can be rewritten as

                                            dK             dE
                                               (t) = − S ∶    dΩ + t ⋅ u̇ dΓ +    𝜌b ⋅ u̇ dΩ.                                                                       (5)
                                            dt        ∫Ω   dt     ∫Γ           ∫Ω

    Next, consider a cyclic deformation of the body from time ta to time tb , such that u(ta ) = u(tb ) everywhere in Ω. It
follows that E(ta ) = E(tb ). Then, the change in kinetic energy over a cycle is given by integrating (5) between ta and
tb —that is,
                                                      tb (                                                                             )
                                                                            dE
                                        ΔK =                 −        S∶       dΩ + t ⋅ u̇ dΓ +    𝜌b ⋅ u̇ dΩ                              dt.                      (6)
                                               ∫ta               ∫Ω         dt     ∫Γ           ∫Ω

   Consider the first term of (6): note that by definition, the internal energy of the body depends only on its state and
that, for an isothermal cyclic deformation process, the deformation and thermal states of the body at the beginning and
end of the process remain identical. Therefore, the change in internal energy must be zero, which can be written as

                                   tb                 tb                   tb                           (                                        )
                                        dUint                dE
                   ΔUint =                    dt =        S∶    dΩdt +                                   −        n ⋅ q dΓ +               𝜌qs dΩ dt = 0,           (7)
                             ∫ta         dt        ∫ta ∫Ω    dt        ∫ta                                   ∫Γ                    ∫Ω

where q is the heat flux and qs is the heat supplied per unit mass. Using the second law of thermodynamics, it can be
shown that the combination of the heat flux and heat supply terms is non-positive, and therefore

                                                      tb (                                      )                   tb
                                                                                                                             dS
                                                         −        n ⋅ qdΓ +               𝜌qs dΩ dt ≤                    T      = 0,                                (8)
                                               ∫t a          ∫Γ                      ∫Ω                       ∫ta            dt
                                                                            tb
                                                                                          dE
                                                                      ∴             S∶       dΩ dt ≥ 0,                                                             (9)
                                                                          ∫ta ∫Ω          dt

where S is the total entropy in the body and (9) follows from (7) and (8). Since the body forces and tractions are assumed
to be time-independent, they perform zero network on the body, as shown in (10) and (11).

                                    tb                                      tb
                                           t ⋅ u̇ dΓdt =                         t ⋅ u̇ dtdΓ =          (t ⋅ u(tb ) − t ⋅ u(ta )) dΓ = 0,                         (10)
                             ∫ta ∫Γ                               ∫Γ ∫ta                         ∫Γ
                             tb                                            tb
                                         b ⋅ u̇ dΩ dt =                         b ⋅ u̇ dt dΩ =           (b ⋅ u(tb ) − b ⋅ u(ta )) dΩ = 0.                        (11)
                          ∫ta ∫Ω                                 ∫Ω ∫ta                            ∫Ω

       Therefore, the change in kinetic energy over a cycle can be rewritten as

                                                                                                   tb
                                                                                                             dE
                                                ΔK = K(tb ) − K(ta ) = −                                S∶      dt dΩ ≤ 0,                                        (12)
                                                                                          ∫Ω ∫ta             dt

where the inequality is a consequence of (9). The non-positivity of the change in the kinetic energy makes intuitive sense:
otherwise, given that the considered cyclic process can be repeated an arbitrary number of times, the existence of a path
of deformation for which ΔK is positive would imply the possibility to generate an infinite amount of kinetic energy using
zero network—which is non-physical. Now, the result ΔK < 0 is also not permissible as by reversing the direction of the
deformation cycle (introducing a negative sign in the above expression) it would lead to ΔK > 0. Hence, the only physical
and dynamically stable possibility is ΔK = 0, which is satisfied for arbitrary Ω and deformation paths if and only if the
integrand of the outer integral in (12) identically vanishes—that is, S ∶ dE = dW is a perfect differential, or equivalently,
S = 𝜕W
     𝜕E
        .                                                                                                                  ▪
                                                                                                                               10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                            2743



    Even if the data used to train the surrogate model is obtained from a hyperelastic material, a staightforward regres-
sion ANN that directly maps strains to stresses in the form ̂         ̂ cannot be expected to necessarily satisfy (3). Even
                                                             S =  𝜃 (E)
in the case of noise-free data and convergence of the loss function to zero, interpolation and extrapolation by a straight-
forward ANN inside and outside the training domain, respectively, is not guaranteed to be conservative. Therefore, in
order to guarantee the hyperelastic property of a regression model for any arbitrary strain input, it is proposed here to
represent the constitutive law by an ANN that learns the strain energy density function as W = 𝜃 (E).̂ To this end, it is
noted that previous works focused on learning hyperelastic material laws from data have either relied on including strain
energy density as part of the training data,21 which is incompatible with physical experiments, or have approximated the
hyperelasticity constraint by weakly enforcing the symmetry of the tangent modulus.22 Consequently, this work proposes
a novel training approach that implicitly forces the ANN to learn the integral of the data, rather than the data itself, by
determining 𝜃 as follows

                                                                (     )           2
                                                           ⎛ 𝜕𝛽 ̂ (m) − ̂
                                                                         Sk(m) ⎞⎟
                                                   ∑  ∑⎜ 𝜕Êk E
                                                   Nm d
                                        𝜃 = argmin         ⎜                    ⎟.
                                             𝛽∈RN𝜃 m=1 k=1 ⎜        𝜎k          ⎟
                                                           ⎝                    ⎠

Hence, in this work, the weights of the ANN are trained so that the partial derivatives of the network with respect
to the input match the training stress data. This promotes the learning of a strain energy density function—up to
an irrelevant additive constant. After the training (is )completed, the stresses can be obtained by differentiating the
                                                𝜕
ANN with respect to the strains—that is, ̂ S= 𝜃 E  ̂
                                                      ̂ . Importantly, the resulting strain–stress mapping is uncondi-
                                                  𝜕E
tionally hyperelastic by construction, regardless of the strain input or the attained smallest value of the training loss
function.
Remark 2. Reverse mode automatic differentiation can be leveraged to exactly differentiate a trained ANN and achieve
computational efficiency in the online computation of stresses. Reverse mode automatic differentiation is particularly
efficient when obtaining the Jacobian of a function f ∶ Rn → Rm , where m ≫ n (in the context of this article where an
ANN is constructed to learn a strain energy density, n = 1 and m = 6). The gradient of the ANN with respect to all of its
inputs can be obtained at roughly the same computational cost as that for one function evaluation. On the other hand,
computing this gradient by finite differencing would require at least m + 1 function evaluations and would be tainted
by numerical errors. The stark difference in online computational cost between eager execution and graph execution of
the ANN model is also noteworthy. Eager execution interprets the code and executes it in real-time, which means that
the evaluation of the constitutive law requires that of W , the construction of the backwards graph, and the propagation
through the backwards graph. This introduces unnecessary computations and potentially software-related computational
overhead. Conversely, graph execution involves interpreting the code as a graph, in which case the backwards graph is
constructed and compiled offline. It implies that the online evaluation of the constitutive law would require only prop-
agation through a single graph that directly relates the strains to the stresses and therefore is computationally more
economical.


3.2            Objectivity

The concept of objectivity is that of material frame indifference—that is, the position or orientation of an observer should
not affect any quantity of interest.23 In particular, an objective scalar is one which has the same values to all observers:
therefore, a strain energy density function must be invariant to any orthogonal transformation of the deformation gradi-
         ̃ denote the strain energy density function of a material expressed in terms of the deformation gradient F. It
ent. Let W
                                ̃ requires that
follows that the objectivity of W

                                                       ̃ (QF) = W
                                                       W        ̃(F)

for any orthogonal matrix Q (i.e., QT Q = I). This condition is essential for numerical simulations using data-driven con-
stitutive models, as the simulation results should not depend on the definition of a reference frame. Let now F = RU
denote the polar decomposition of the deformation gradient, where R is an orthogonal matrix describing a rigid body
                                                                                                                                    10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2744                                                                                                                 AS’AD et al.



mode and U is the matrix associated with the stretch tensor. Choosing Q = RT leads to
                                                (   )    (    )
                                              ̃ RT F = W
                                              W        ̃ RT RU = W
                                                                 ̃(U).

In other words, the objectivity of the strain energy density function requires that this function be expressible solely in
terms of U and not the individual components of F. Hence, a necessary condition for objectivity in this case is the existence
of some functions W and T such that W   ̃(F) = W(T (U)). This is also a sufficient condition, because as shown below, the
stretch tensor is invariant under arbitrary orthogonal transformations of F

                                                     QF = Q(RU) = RU,

                                                                             1 2
where R = QR is an orthogonal matrix. Since the Green–Lagrange strain E =      (U − I) is expressible purely as a function
                                                                             2
                                                                                              ̃ through the existence of
of U, it follows that using E as input to the ANN automatically guarantees the objectivity of W
W. Indeed,
                                            (                      (          )
                              ̃(QF) = W         1( T T      )        1( T   )
                                                                                ̃(F).
                              W                   F Q QF − I ) = W     F F−I =W
                                                2                    2

Then, for compatibility with a hyperelastic strain–stress map, the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress S must be chosen as the
corresponding stress measure, as it is the energy conjugate of E.


3.3       Material stability

                                                                                                                        ̃ in
Material stability requires that small loads do not lead to arbitrary deformations. It is ensured by the ellipticity of W
  24                                   ̃
F. A strain energy density function W (F) is elliptic if and only if

                                                     ̃
                                                    𝜕W
                                        (a ⊗ b) ∶      F ∶ (a ⊗ b) ≥ 0 ∀a, b ∈ R3 .
                                                    𝜕F

For twice differentiable strain energy density functions, ellipticity is equivalent to convexity along directions correspond-
ing to rank-one tensors (commonly referred to as rank-one convexity). Physically, it implies that only real wave speeds
are permissible in the material. In general, enforcing a model to be elliptic a priori is a challenging task: for this reason, a
common approach in continuum mechanics for achieving this goal is to enforce instead a stronger mathematical property
that implies ellipticity—for example,

                                          convexity ⇒ polyconvexity ⇒ ellipticity.

Certainly, ellipticity can be achieved by enforcing the convexity of W  ̃(F). However, requiring the strain energy density
          ̃
function W (F) to be convex in F is too strong a condition, as it places non-physical restrictions on the material behavior.25
Since the domain where the deformation gradients has a positive determinant is non-convex, convexity in F necessarily
excludes the physically reasonable growth condition W   ̃ → ∞ as det F → 0+ , which places a barrier on material “inver-
sion.” Without this barrier, it would be possible to collapse the volume of the material to a point or line using a finite
amount of work. Furthermore, convexity of W   ̃ in F does not allow for the nonuniqueness of the energy minimizer of the
Euler–Lagrange equations, which prevents observing instability phenomena such as buckling. Last but not least, it can
be proven through counterexamples that the convexity of W    ̃(F) violates objectivity.26 For all these reasons, the standard
approach in constitutive modeling is to enforce instead polyconvexity, which is a weaker constraint. To this end, it is noted
that the strain energy density function is polyconvex in F if and only if it is expressible as a convex function of the minors
of F—that is,

                                                  ̃(F) = f (F, Cof F, det F),
                                  ∃f convex, s.t. W                              ∀F ∈ R3×3 .

However, objectivity was identified in Section 3.2 as an essential property, particularly in the context of the
numerical exploitation of data-driven modeling: for this reason, the objective strain measure E was chosen
                                                                                                                                   10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                                2745



as input to an ANN model. Hence, enforcing polyconvexity in F is difficult as E is not in general convex
in F.
    On the other hand, consider the convexity of W in E, which is equivalent to the symmetric positive semi-definiteness
of the gradient of S with respect to E—that is,

                                                               𝜕S
                                                         C=       ≽ 0.
                                                               𝜕E

The concept of symmetric positive semi-definiteness is generalized to fourth-order tensors as follows. An n-dimensional
fourth-order tensor denoted by T is said to be symmetric positive semi-definite if ∀ V, W ∈ Symn (R), the following two
conditions hold27

                                                  V ∶ T ∶ W = W ∶ T ∶ V,

                                                        V ∶ T ∶ V ≥ 0.

Now, double contracting the Hessian of W (E(F)) with respect to F on both left and right sides by some test matrix 𝚿 ∈
R3×3 leads to

                                𝜕2W             (    ) (           )     (           )
                           𝚿∶        F ∶ 𝚿 = S ∶ 𝚿T 𝚿 + 𝚿T F + FT 𝚿 ∶ C ∶ 𝚿T F + FT 𝚿 .                                    (13)
                                𝜕F𝜕F

    If the above result is positive for some F, then W is locally convex in the deformation gradient at F. The first term on
the right side of (13) represents the geometric stiffness and the second term the material stiffness. The convexity of W in
E ensures that the material stiffness term is positive, since C ≽ 0 and contracted on both sides with a symmetric matrix.
When S ≽ 0, or the material is in a tensile state, the geometric stiffness term is non-negative. Hence, in a tensile state,
the convexity of W in E implies the local convexity of W in F, which implies local ellipticity and therefore local material
stability. This result is related to the following theorem proven in Reference 28.
Theorem 2. If W(E) is convex and u0 (x) is a weak solution of the Euler–Lagrange equations, and if ∀x ∈ Ω S(u0 (x)) ≽ 0,
u0 (x) is a global energy minimizer.
    Nonetheless, the convexity of W(E) does not imply the global convexity of W in F, as in a compressive state (S ≺ 0), the
geometric stiffness term in (13) is negative: therefore, the entire right side of (13) can be non-positive. Hence, the convexity
of W in E allows for the nonuniqueness of the solution as in buckling (compressive state) and for the appropriate growth
of W as det F → 0+ , while also using an objective strain measure.
    The convexity property is also desirable from a modeling perspective, as it implies the monotonicity of stress as a
function of strain. In the case where the strain–stress training data are noisy, a non-monotone model may conform to the
noise and thus produce spurious oscillations. However, as illustrated in Figure 1, a monotone model can regularize the
noise and resist the generation of spurious oscillations.
    For all these reasons, it is desirable to enforce the convexity of the hyperelastic ANN W = 𝜃 (E)     ̂ with respect to its
                                                                                                  29
inputs, using the following sufficient conditions of input-convex neural networks (ICNNs):

1. All weights, except those connecting directly to the input, are non-negative.
2. The activation functions are convex and non-decreasing.

    To ensure the positivity of the weights in a manner that is compatible with automatic differentiation and the uncon-
strained gradient-based optimization algorithms used to train ANNs, the following form of positive weights is proposed.
Where the positivity constraint is relevant in the lth layer of an ANN, the weights are replaced by
                                                                              (            )
                                                                       1             2 (l)
                                       ij(l) = Softplus((l) ; 𝛼) =       log 1 + e𝛼 ij ,
                                                          ij           𝛼 2


where the parameters (l)
                      ij
                          and 𝛼 are trainable parameters of the ANN. Crucially, the ranges of these parameters are
not constrained. As constructed above, the parameters ij(l) always have non-negative values. “Passthrough” layers with
                                                                                                                                       10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2746                                                                                                                    AS’AD et al.




FIGURE 1           Effect of the convexity of W (or monotonicity of S) on a regression model in the presence of noise



unconstrained weights  ̃(l) can also be included to directly connect the ANN inputs to deeper hidden layers, in order to
                          ij
improve the predictive power of the network without sacrificing the convexity property. Moreover, using a generic nota-
tion, any convex function f of the input vector x can be added to the ANN’s output y (in this work, f (x) = xT AT Ax is used,
where A is yet another matrix-valued trainable parameter of the ANN).(
                                                                              ⋃Nl ( (l) ̃ (l) (l) ))                   ̃ are
    In summary, the parameters of the network can be written as 𝜃 = A, 𝛼,             , ,b  l=1
                                                                                                       , where  and 
                                           ̃ ij , respectively, and the ICNN is described in Algorithm 2.
matrices collecting the parameters ij and 


Algorithm 2. Forward pass of the proposed ICNN

Input: x (0) ; Output: y
               (                   )
 1: x (1) = 𝜙   ̃(1) x (0) + b(1)
 2: for l = 2, …(, Nl − 1 do                                       )
 3:                                                   ̃(l) x (0)
         x (l) = 𝜙 Softplus((l) ; 𝛼)x (l−1) + b(l) + 
 4: end for
                                            ( (0) )
 5: y = Softplus((Nl ) ; 𝛼)x (Nl −1) + f    x

                                                  ( )
    To compute the stresses, the ANN W = 𝜃 E       ̂ must be differentiated. To compute the tangent modulus, it must be
differentiated twice. Hence, in addition to being non-decreasing and convex, the activation function of the ANN should
also be at least twice differentiable. Furthermore, since the gradients of the loss function computed during training involve
second derivatives of the network (because the proposed loss function contains first derivatives of the network), the
activation function should have non-vanishing second derivatives. These restrictions exclude popular activation functions
such as the hyperbolic tangent (tanh), the rectified linear unit (ReLU), the exponential linear unit (ELU), and the Softplus
activation functions. Accordingly, a new activation function that satisfies all aforementioned requirements, namely, the
SoftplusSquared function, is proposed here. It is defined by
                                                                                        (          )2
                                                                                1              𝛽2z
                                            𝜙(z) = SoftplusSquared(z; 𝛽) =          log  1 + e        ,                       (14)
                                                                               2𝛽 4

where 𝛽 is a parameter that controls the curvature of the function at the origin and contributes an additional learnable
parameter to the network. Note that a desirable property for an activation function is the good approximation of the iden-
tity function near the origin. Unfortunately, the SoftplusSquared function (14) fails to do so. Nonetheless, this issue can
be corrected by a combination of shifting and scaling when required, without compromising any of the other desirable
properties of an activation function. Another activation function that satisfies all aforementioned requirements is the
                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                              2747



SoftExponential function:30 however, it did not perform as well as the SoftplusSquared function for the problems
considered in this article.


3.4            Consistency

In this work, a consistent material law is defined as a law that enables a numerical computation such as an FE analysis
simulation to preserve the rigid body modes of a structure whose material it describes. In other words, a consistent mate-
rial law maps a state of zero strain onto a state of zero stress and therefore ensures that S(0) = 0. In general, even when
the training data satisfies this property, a regression ANN model may violate it. This is unacceptable for numerical simu-
lations, as it causes a body to deform in the absence of a load or a prescribed displacement. In the context of a hyperelastic
model, some structure must be imposed on the strain energy density response surface so that it has a zero gradient at the
origin. For fully connected ANNs, this is a non-trivial task because the activation functions seldom have zero gradients
at the origin. Therefore, it is proposed here to enforce consistency by representing the strain energy density function by
the sum of the ANN of interest and a linear correction term, as follows
                                                  ( )    ( )
                                                 W E      ̂ + h ⋅ E,
                                                   ̂ = 𝜃 E       ̂                                                      (15)
                                             ( )     ( ) 𝜕 ( )
                                          ⇒̂
                                           S Ê = 𝜕W Ê =   𝜃 ̂
                                                              E + h.                                                     (16)
                                                   ̂
                                                  𝜕E       ̂
                                                          𝜕E
                     𝜕
    Choosing h = − ̂𝜃 (0) guarantees the desired consistency property. Furthermore, the ANN defined by (15) and (16)
                      𝜕E
preserves hyperelasticity as well as the convexity of the strain energy density function. In practice, it is important not to
perform the correction described in (16) a posteriori—that is, after the ANN has been trained—as doing so may decrease
the ANN’s accuracy away from the origin. Instead, the representation (16) should be embedded in the training procedure
by altering the loss function as follows

                                                            ( (m) ) 𝜕                   2
                                                       ⎛ 𝜕𝛽 E
                                                             ̂     −     𝛽
                                                                           (0) − ̂
                                                                                 S (m) ⎞
                                               ∑ ∑⎜ 𝜕Êk
                                                 Nm   d
                                                                       ̂k
                                                                      𝜕E          k ⎟
                                    𝜃 = argmin         ⎜                               ⎟.
                                         𝛽∈RN𝜃 m=1 k=1 ⎜            𝜎k                 ⎟
                                                       ⎝                               ⎠


4        APPLICAT IONS AND PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

The main purpose of this section is two-fold: (1) to highlight the merits of the proposed mechanics-informed ANN
approach for data-driven modeling using several FE analysis examples; and (2) to demonstrate its potential for achieving
computational tractability in an FE computational homogenization framework developed for the nonlinear, dynamic,
two-scale (macro-micro) modeling of woven fabrics.13 This framework is based on the concept of a locally attached
micro-structure31-34 and more specifically, on the generalization of the “FE squared” (or FE2 ) method.33
   For convenience, both parts of the stated objective are discussed using: the same material, namely, a woven fabric
material made of Nylon yarns; and the same FE-based analysis framework, namely, the aforementioned computational
homogenization framework for the modeling of woven fabrics.13 Hence, throughout this section:

• Every reported FE analysis is a multi-scale analysis based on the computational homogenization framework for woven
  fabrics described in Reference 13.
• The macro-scale FE model is always based on membrane elements with a single Gauss point quadrature each and thus
  calls for a constitutive law for plane-stress problems (SZ = [S33 S23 S13 ]T = 0). Such a law can be written as SP = g(EP ),
  where g ∶ R3 → R3 , EP = [E11 E22 2E12 ]T , and SP = [S11 S22 S12 ]T . Hence, it is noted that all arguments and methods
  presented in Section 3 remain valid when all occurrences of E  ̂ and ̂S in that section are replaced by EP and SP .
• At the micro-scale level, the geometry of the representative volume element (RVE) for the woven fabric material made
  of Nylon yarns is that shown in Figure 3. The corresponding FE model is geometrically nonlinear. It is built using 1024
  brick elements, 1836 nodes, 5508 degrees of freedom (dofs), 4 pairs of contact surfaces where the yarns interact with
                                                                                                                                      10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2748                                                                                                                   AS’AD et al.



   each other and contact is enforced by the penalty method, and periodic boundary conditions. At this level, the material
   is represented by the Saint Venant–Kirchhoff material law with a Young’s modulus E = 3.5 × 109 Pa and a Poisson ratio
   𝜈 = 0.4.

    To this end, this section is organized as follows. First, the data generation process is explained and the training data
set is presented. Next, the individual and complementary merits of the various mechanics-informed constraints proposed
in this article are highlighted (in terms of robustness, stability, and accuracy) using a variety of small-scale but represen-
tative test problems. For this purpose, the following three ANNs are considered for constructing data-driven constitutive
models:

• A standard regression ANN designed to guarantee objectivity and referred to in the remainder of this section as the
  standard regression ANN.
• An ANN designed to guarantee objectivity, consistency, as well as dynamic stability, and referred to in the remainder
  of this section as the hyperelastic ANN.
• An ANN designed to guarantee objectivity, consistency, dynamic stability, as well as convexity, and referred to in the
  remainder of this section as the convex hyperelastic ANN.

    Specifically, in each FE analysis discussed below, some or all of the above ANNs are used to construct the data-driven
mappings between the Green–Lagrange strain predicted by the macro-scale FE model and the second Piola–Kirchhoff
stress tensor obtained through the application of homogenization to the counterpart micro-scale FE model.13 In the show-
case application discussed in Section 4.6, only the convex hyperelastic ANN is used for this purpose; and to demonstrate
the enablement of computational tractability for nonlinear computational homogenization frameworks based on the con-
cept of a locally attached micro-structure in general—and the FE2 method in particular—when applied to large-scale,
nonlinear structural computations.
    All analyses reported in this section were performed using AERO Suite, its nonlinear FE structural analyzer AERO-S
equipped with the computational homogenization framework described in Reference 13, and its flow solver AERO-F.35
All ANN models were constructed and trained using the open source machine learning framework PyTorch.


4.1       Data collection
                                                                                              {( (m) (m) )}Nm
To train and evaluate the three ANN models specified above, a data set of the form              EP , SP       is generated
                                                                                                               m=1
using the concept of a numerical coupon static test analogous to the tensile test. Here, the coupon is triangular with unit
base and height, and pinned at one corner as shown in Figure 2. At the macro-scale level, it is modeled using a single,
geometrically nonlinear, triangular membrane element with a single Gauss point for stress evaluation. At the micro-scale
level, the geometry of the RVE and its FE discretization are those described above and illustrated in Figure 3.
    The virtual test is performed by prescribing at the two free corners the displacements (u1 , u2 , u3 ) shown in Figure 2.
These are sampled in [−0.1, 0.3] × [−0.1, 0.3] × [−0.3, 0.3]. Each sampled data set (u1 , u2 , u3 ) results in a prescribed strain
EP that is transformed into a set of displacement boundary conditions for defining at the micro-scale level a nonlinear,
displacement-driven, static analysis problem. The stresses obtained from the solution of this problem are homogenized
via a spatial averaging procedure and forced to satisfy the plane-stress conditions using the algorithm proposed in
Reference 36.
    The generated strain–stress data are reported in Figure 4. It reveals a weakness in axial compression, due to the buck-
ling of the yarns. It also shows that the material is significantly weaker in shear than in axial tension, since the yarns
can slide past each other with little resistance. Hence, the generated data justify the choice of the RVE as weaknesses in
compression and shear typically characterize woven fabric materials.


4.2       Model robustness

Numerically generated data tends to be highly idealized, in the sense that: it can be generated in a large domain, at a
high resolution; and it is by default noise-free. On the other hand, data collected from physical experiments tends to be
                                                                                                                                                10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                                             2749




F I G U R E 2 Displacement-driven numerical coupon static test problem: FE discretization at the macro-scale level using a single
membrane element with a single Gauss point




FIGURE 3         Geometry and static behavior of the RVE in the presence of contact: Bi-axial compression (left) and bi-axial tension (right)



sparse and noisy, and seldom covers the entire domain of interest. This contrast is noteworthy as overfitting is a com-
mon issue in the construction of ANNs.37 Hence, performance assessment is performed herein with particular attention
to the ability of an ANN to deal with noise, interpolate within the training subdomain, and extrapolate outside this
subdomain.
    To support such an assessment, the training data set is assembled from the generated data set in two steps, as follows.
First, a small bounding box within the domain where data were collected is considered: this box covers the strain space
[−0.05, 0.2] × [−0.05, 0.2] × [−0.3, 0.3] and contains approximately 50% of the numerically generated data (Figure 5). Next,
50% of the data contained in this box is sampled randomly and 5% Gaussian noise is added to the sampled data. The result
is an approximate 25%–75% train–test data split, where the training data is noisy and therefore more representative of
experimental data.
    Figures 6–8, where each black box delimits the training subdomain, graphically depict the performance of all three
ANNs built for constructing data-driven constitutive models for the considered material made of Nylon yarns. They show
that:

• The standard regression ANN overfits the training data: it exhibits spurious oscillations both inside and outside the
  training subdomain.
10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
     AS’AD et al.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      F I G U R E 4 Data collected from the numerical coupon test—Projections onto the: S11 − E11 plane (top-left); S22 − E22 plane (top-right);




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Numerically generated data domain and training data subdomain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and S12 − 2E12 plane (bottom)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FIGURE 5
     2750
                                                                                                                                                  10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                                               2751




FIGURE 6          Performance of the standard regression ANN for the 25%–75% train–test split scenario: S11 − E11 (left) and S12 − 2E12 (right)




FIGURE 7          Performance of the hyperelastic ANN for the 25%–75% train–test split scenario: S11 − E11 (left) and S12 − 2E12 (right)



• The hyperelastic ANN performs much better inside the training subdomain (at least as far as axial stress is concerned),
  where it handles well the noisy data. However, it performs poorly outside the training subdomain.
• On the other hand, the convex hyperelastic ANN performs remarkably well inside as well as outside the training sub-
  domain, particularly for the prediction of the axial stress. It also captures remarkably well the nonlinear behavior of the
  stress around small to vanishing values of the strain, when the fabric material switches from tension to compression
  and vice-versa.
• Of all three ANNs, only the convex hyperelastic ANN captures reasonably well the highly nonlinear shear behavior.




4.3            Preservation of the rigid body modes (consistency)

The significance of consistency for material modeling is highlighted here using the explicit FE transient analysis of a
hollow cylindrical membrane subjected only to a uniform initial velocity. The exact solution of this problem is a rigid
body translation along the direction of the initial velocity. Figure 9 shows that when using an inconsistent ANN for
representing the material law, the structure collapses in time, despite the absence of any form of loading. This is because
even though the membrane has initially a zero strain state, the inconsistent ANN maps this state to a nonzero stress state
                                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2752                                                                                                                              AS’AD et al.



that continuously deforms it. Figure 9 also shows that on the other hand, the FE simulation based on a consistent ANN
               ( )
where W = 𝜃 EP + h ⋅ EP reproduces the exact solution of the problem.



4.4        Material stability and static analysis

To emphasize the importance of satisfying material stability when representing a nonlinear elastic constitutive law
by a regression ANN, the nonlinear FE static analysis of the same hollow cylindrical membrane from Section 4.3,
this time pressurized by a pressure difference of 2 bar (Figure 10), is considered here, using two instances of New-
ton’s method: (a) one where the entire load is applied in a single step; and (b) another one where the load is applied
incrementally and the nonlinear solver is converged before applying the next load increment. The latter case serves
the purpose of avoiding intrinsic numerical convergence difficulties that are not necessarily related to data-driven
modeling of the constitutive law. Figure 11 shows that in test (a), the FE analyses based on both the standard regres-
sion ANN and the hyperelastic ANN diverge at some iteration, but that based on the convex hyperelastic ANN
converges. The figure also shows that at some load factor in test (b), the non-convex ANNs diverge again, but the




FIGURE 8         Performance of the convex hyperelastic ANN for the 25%–75% train–test split scenario: S11 − E11 (left) and S12 − 2E12 (right)




FIGURE 9        Hollow cylindrical membrane with only uniform initial velocity: t = 0 s (top); t = 0.05 s when using a standard regression
ANN in the FE analysis (middle); and t = 0.05 s when using a consistent ANN (bottom)




F I G U R E 10     Pressurized hollow cylindrical membrane at ΔP = 2 bar
                                                                                                                                                   10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                                                2753



convex hyperelastic ANN converges to a physically reasonable strain value. These results suggest the presence of a
spurious material instability in the system when constitutive modeling is performed using the first two data-driven
models (or the nonexistence of a solution to the considered problem), rather than simply the occurrence of numerical
divergence.


4.5            Dynamic stability and transient analysis

To demonstrate for elastic materials the relationship between hyperelasticity and dynamic stability discussed in this arti-
cle, the explicit FE transient analysis of an undamped, prestressed, square and flat membrane subjected to a constant
pressure differential (Figure 12) is considered. In the absence of damping, the membrane can be expected to oscillate
cyclically after some initial transient behavior. Figure 13 reports the time-histories of the vertical displacement of the
center node of the FE model and those of the total kinetic energy in the membrane, predicted using all three ANNs for
data-driven modeling of the material law. It shows that for this problem, the FE analysis performed using the standard
regression ANN—which does not necessarily represent a hyperelastic material—becomes unstable at some point in time,
due to the accumulation of the kinetic energy. It also shows that on the other hand, the counterpart FE analyses per-
formed using the hyperelastic and convex hyperelastic ANNs maintain bounded displacements and kinetic energy, and
thus remain stable at all times.




F I G U R E 11     Static analysis of a pressurized hollow cylinder: Direct application of the entire load (left) and incremental load stepping
(right)




F I G U R E 12     Prestressed membrane subject to pressure from the bottom: In the undeformed state (left) and in a deformed state (right)
                                                                                                                                                   10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2754                                                                                                                                AS’AD et al.



                                       Regression ANN                                                     Regression ANN
                          0.2                                                                 10
                          0.1                                                                  5
                           0
                                                                                               0
       Displacement (m)




                                                                         Kinetic energy (J)
                                       Hyperelastic ANN                                                   Hyperelastic ANN
                          0.2                                                                 10
                          0.1                                                                  5
                           0
                                                                                               0

                                    Convex hyperelastic ANN                                            Convex hyperelastic ANN
                          0.2                                                                 10
                          0.1                                                                  5
                           0
                                                                                               0
                                0           1            2                                         0           1               2
                                            Time (s)                                                           Time (s)
F I G U R E 13      Transient analysis of a prestressed membrane subject to a pressure difference: Displacement of the center (left) and total
kinetic energy (right)



4.6                       Showcase application: Multi-scale simulation of supersonic PID

The results of the FSI simulations of the SR03 flight test of NASA’s Advanced Supersonic Parachute Inflation Research
Experiment (ASPIRE) for qualifying the parachute system of the rover Perseverance that landed on Mars on February 18,
2021 are reported here for two different material models of the canopy made of Nylon yarns:

• A homogeneous, linear, orthotropic model with finite strains.
• The nonlinear material model furnished by the computational homogenization framework for modeling of woven
  fabrics described in Reference 13, equipped with a convex hyperelastic ANN for building the data-driven mapping
  between the Green–Lagrange strain of the macro-scale FE model of the parachute system described below and the
  second Piola–Kirchhoff of the stress tensor computed using the RVE shown in Figure 3. It is noted that when the
  standard regression ANN is used to furnish a similar material model, the numerical FSI simulation discussed below
  rapidly becomes unconditionally unstable and therefore cannot be performed, which further supports the theorem
  proved in Section 3.1 emphasizing the importance of hyperelasticity for dynamic stability.

    The numerically simulated parachute system—including its canopy and 80 suspension lines, as well as the slen-
der forebody—is displayed in Figure 14(left) in its as-built (stress-free) configuration. It is geometrically identical
to the parachute system used for the SR03 ASPIRE flight test. The supersonic FSI simulation is started from the
line-stretch stage, which is modeled here by the accordion-like folding of the canopy shown in Figure 14(right). This
initial configuration prestresses the suspension lines at t = 0 s, in an attempt to accurately model the line-stretch
stage.
    The detailed FE structural model of the parachute system consists of: 267,878 geometrically nonlinear membrane
elements discretizing the canopy; 80,000 geometrically nonlinear beam elements discretizing the 80 suspension lines;
representations of the contact surfaces associated with the accordion-like folding of the canopy at t = 0 s; and 4968 rigid
solid elements representing the forebody and its aerodynamic shape.
                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                              2755




F I G U R E 14   ASPIRE parachute system in: As-built configuration (top) and folded configuration (bottom)




    Air is modeled as a perfect gas and its viscosity is modeled using Sutherland’s temperature-dependent viscosity model.
The viscous flow is modeled using AERO-F’s LES turbulence modeling capability. The free-stream conditions are set to
those of the SR03 flight test at the instance of line-stretch38 —that is, the free-stream Mach number is set to M∞ = 1.88,
the free-stream density is set to 𝜌∞ = 6.01 × 10−3 kg m−3 , and the free-stream pressure is set to P∞ = 414 Pa. While the
supersonic FSI simulation was performed in dimensional mode, it is noted here that the corresponding Reynolds number
based on the parachute diameter is ReD = 3.3 × 106 .
    Due to the anticipated large shape and topology changes of the flexible parachute system during its deployment, and
the unrestrained motion of the rigid forebody, the FSI simulation of supersonic PID is performed using the arbitrary
Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) formulation of the embedded (or immersed) boundary method FIVER (finite volume method
with exact two-material Riemann problems)39 described in Reference 40. Hence, the parachute system and the forebody
are embedded in a background CFD grid that is adapted in time to resolve all flow features of interest (boundary layers,
shocks, and wakes) using automatic adaptive mesh refinement (AMR).41 The 8% porosity of the woven fabric of the canopy
is modeled using the homogenized flux-body force treatment of compressible viscous porous wall boundary conditions
presented in Reference 42.
    Finally, the structural and fluid discretizations are coupled using the stability-preserving, second-order, time-accurate,
implicit-explicit fluid-structure partitioned analysis procedure described in Reference 43.
    Figure 15 displays snapshots of the computed structural evolution of the parachute system and the corresponding
Mach contours.
    Figure 16(left) reports the predicted time-histories of the total drag generated by the parachute system using the two
different material models described above and contrasts them with their counterpart measured during the flight test.38
The reader can observe that both considered fabric material models lead to simulated total drag time-histories that match
reasonably well their counterpart measured during the SR03 flight test, particularly during the inflation process (t < 0.4
s). Precisely, the material model based on the convex hyperelastic ANN predicts more accurately the inflation time and
the peak inflation, and thus the inflation speed. This may be attributed to the ability of this ANN to capture, unlike
the linear orthotropic model, the nonlinearity of the behavior of the fabric at low strains, as already demonstrated in
Section 4.2.
    However, Figure 16(right) shows that the two considered numerical FSI simulations predict significantly different
time-histories of the maximum von Mises stress in the canopy, which is a useful indicator for material failure. This sub-
stantial discrepancy can be attributed to the nonlinearities captured by the ANN-based material model near the zero
strain values, which prevent any compressive contribution to the von Mises stress from being as large as in the case of a
linear orthotropic material law. This hypothesis is supported by the von Mises stress contours computed at t = 0.23 s and
shown in Figure 17, where in the case of the linear orthotropic material model, the areas of high von Mises stress appear
to coincide with regions of compression in the canopy. Intuitively, this suggests that the fabric material is more compliant
                                                                                                                                                     10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2756                                                                                                                                  AS’AD et al.




F I G U R E 15     Numerical FSI simulation of the SR03 flight test of NASA’s ASPIRE project: Parachute evolutions and Mach contours
computed at t = 0.12 s (left); t = 0.20 s (middle); and t = 0.36 s (right)
                                                                       Max von Mises stress (MPa)


                                                                                                    300
                     60

                                                                                                    200
       Drag (klbf)




                     40


                                                                                                    100
                     20       Linear orthotropic
                              Convex hyperelastic ANN                                                         Linear orthotropic
                              ASPIRE SR03 flight test                                                         Convex hyperelastic ANN
                      0                                                                               0
                          0   0.2         0.4           0.6                                               0    0.2       0.4    0.6
                                    Time (s)                                                                         Time (s)

F I G U R E 16        Numerical FSI simulation of the SR03 flight test of NASA’s ASPIRE project: Computed versus measured time-histories of
the total drag (left) and computed time-histories of the maximum canopy von Mises stress (right)



than predicted using a linear material law and thus less likely to fail. Unfortunately, the flight test data does not include
information that can be used for validating a computed von Mises stress result.
    Finally, Figure 18 compares the time-evolution of the canopy shape numerically predicted using the convex hyperelas-
tic ANN with that recorded during the flight test, at four different time-instances. It shows that the numerical simulation
captures well the canopy inflation time as well as the unfurling pattern. In particular, the numerically simulated infla-
tion of the canopy mimics well its lobe-like character observed in the flight test data and reproduces the circumferential
wavelength of the lobes: this gives confidence that the multi-scale ANN material law accurately captured the behavior of
the fabric material.
                                                                                                                                             10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                                          2757




F I G U R E 17 Numerical FSI simulation of the SR03 flight test of NASA’s ASPIRE project: von Mises stress contours computed at
t = 0.23 s using the linear orthotropic constitutive law (left) and the convex hyperelastic ANN (right)




F I G U R E 18   SR03 flight test of NASA’s ASPIRE project: Images extracted at four different time-instances from the video of the
parachute deployment (left) and corresponding numerical simulation results obtained using the convex hyperelastic ANN (right)


5        S U M M ARY AN D CON CLU SIONS

ANNs have excellent nonlinear function fitting capabilities. As such, they are prime candidates for data-driven constitu-
tive modeling. However, it is shown in this article that even for simple nonlinear laws such as nonlinear elasticity, they
are not necessarily robust and may require a large amount of training data. However, it is also shown that these defi-
ciencies can be eliminated by teaching ANNs some basic notions of mechanics such as objectivity, consistency, dynamic
stability, and convexity. The article presents a framework for teaching ANNs such notions of mechanics in the form of
                                                                                                                                                10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2758                                                                                                                             AS’AD et al.



complementary implicit constraints. Through a series of carefully designed simple FE analyses, it highlights the merits
of each constraint or set of constraints for robustness, numerical stability, and accuracy. Equally importantly, it is shown
in this article that properly designed ANNs enable nonlinear computational homogenization frameworks based on the
concept of a locally attached micro-structure to achieve computational tractability, even for large-scale, nonlinear, FE
structural computations such as those pertaining to the dynamic analysis of the supersonic inflation of a parachute system
whose canopy is made of a woven fabric material.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

ORCID
Faisal As’ad https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8538-9283
Philip Avery https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1310-6790
Charbel Farhat https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2563-8820

REFERENCES
 1. Lin H, Xie S, Yong R, Chen Y, Du S. An empirical statistical constitutive relationship for rock joint shearing considering scale effect.
    C R Méc. 2019;347(8):561-575.
 2. Besdo D, Ihlemann J. A phenomenological constitutive model for rubberlike materials and its numerical applications. Int J Plast.
    2003;19(7):1019-1036.
 3. Pond D, McBride A, Davids L, Reddy B, Limbert G. Microstructurally-based constitutive modelling of the skin–linking intrinsic ageing to
    microstructural parameters. J Theor Biol. 2018;444:108-123.
 4. As’ad F, Avery P, Farhat C. A mechanics-informed artificial neural network approach in data-driven constitutive modeling. Proceedings
    of the AIAA Scitech 2022 Forum; 2022:0100; AIAA.
 5. Ghaboussi J, Garrett J Jr, Wu X. Knowledge-based modeling of material behavior with neural networks. J Eng Mech. 1991;117(1):132-153.
 6. Ghaboussi J, Pecknold DA, Zhang M, Haj-Ali RM. Autoprogressive training of neural network constitutive models. Int J Numer Methods
    Eng. 1998;42(1):105-126.
 7. Theocaris P, Panagiotopoulos P. Plasticity including the Bauschinger effect, studied by a neural network approach. Acta Mech.
    1995;113(1):63-75.
 8. Furukawa T, Yagawa G. Implicit constitutive modelling for viscoplasticity using neural networks. Int J Numer Methods Eng.
    1998;43(2):195-219.
 9. Huang DZ, Xu K, Farhat C, Darve E. Learning constitutive relations from indirect observations using deep neural networks. J Comput
    Phys. 2020;416:109491.
10. Le B, Yvonnet J, He QC. Computational homogenization of nonlinear elastic materials using neural networks. Int J Numer Methods Eng.
    2015;104(12):1061-1084.
11. Arnold SM, Piekenbrock M, Ricks TM, Stuckner J. Multiscale analysis of composites using surrogate modeling and information optimal
    designs. Proceedings of the AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum; 2020:1863; AIAA.
12. Stuckner J, Graeber S, Weborg B, Ricks TM, Arnold SM. Tractable multiscale modeling with an embedded microscale surrogate.
    Proceedings of the AIAA Scitech 2021 Forum. AIAA; 2021:1963.
13. Avery P, Huang DZ, He W, Ehlers J, Derkevorkian A, Farhat C. A computationally tractable framework for nonlinear dynamic multiscale
    modeling of membrane woven fabrics. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2021;122(10):2598-2625.
14. Borrvall T, Ehle C, Stratton T. A fabric material model with stress map functionality in LS-DYNA. Proceedings of the 10th European
    LS-DYNA Conference. LS-DYNA; 2015.
15. Flaschel M, Kumar S, De Lorenzis L. Unsupervised discovery of interpretable hyperelastic constitutive laws. Comput Methods Appl Mech
    Eng. 2021;381:113852.
16. Xu K, Huang DZ, Darve E. Learning constitutive relations using symmetric positive definite neural networks. J Comput Phys.
    2021;428:110072.
17. Klein DK, Fernández M, Martin RJ, Neff P, Weeger O. Polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity with neural networks. J Mech Phys Solids.
    2022;159:104703.
18. Fan FL, Xiong J, Li M, Wang G. On interpretability of artificial neural networks: a survey. IEEE Trans Radiat Plasma Med Sci.
    2021;5(6):741-760.
19. Carroll M. Must elastic materials be hyperelastic? Math Mec Solids. 2009;14(4):369-376.
20. Reiner M, Abir D. Second-order Effects in Elasticity, Plasticity and Fluid Dynamics: International Symposium, Haifa, Israel, April 23-27,
    1964:1962; Macmillan.
21. Vlassis NN, Ma R, Sun W. Geometric deep learning for computational mechanics Part I: anisotropic hyperelasticity. Comput Methods Appl
    Mech Eng. 2020;371:113299.
22. Weber P, Geiger J, Wagner W. Constrained neural network training and its application to hyperelastic material modeling. Comput Mech.
    2021;68(5):1179-1204.
                                                                                                                                                  10970207, 2022, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6957 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [29/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
AS’AD et al.                                                                                                                               2759



23. Noll W. A mathematical theory of the mechanical behavior of continuous media. The Foundations of Mechanics and Thermodynamics.
    Springer; 1974:1-30.
24. Knowles JK, Sternberg E. On the ellipticity of the equations of nonlinear elastostatics for a special material. J Elast. 1975;5(3):341-361.
25. Marsden JE, Hughes TJ. Mathematical Foundations of Elasticity. Courier Corporation; 1994.
26. Coleman BD, Noll W. On the thermostatics of continuous media. Arch Ration Mech Anal. 1959;4(1):97-128.
27. Hoger A. Positive definiteness of the elasticity tensor of a residually stressed material. J Elast. 1994;36(3):201-226.
28. Yang Gao D, Neff P, Roventa I, Thiel C. On the convexity of nonlinear elastic energies in the right Cauchy-Green tensor. J Elast.
    2017;127(2):303-308.
29. Amos B, Xu L, Kolter JZ. Input convex neural networks. Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning; 2017:146-155;
    PMLR.
30. Godfrey LB, Gashler MS. A continuum among logarithmic, linear, and exponential functions, and its potential to improve generalization
    in neural networks. Proceedings of the 2015 7th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engineering and
    Knowledge Management (IC3K); 2015:481-486; IEEE.
31. Smit RJ, Brekelmans WM, Meijer HE. Prediction of the mechanical behavior of nonlinear heterogeneous systems by multi-level finite
    element modeling. Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng 1998; 155(1-2): 181–192.
32. Miehe C, Schröder J, Schotte J. Computational homogenization analysis in finite plasticity simulation of texture development in
    polycrystalline materials. Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng. 1999;171(3-4):387-418.
33. Feyel F, Chaboche JL. FE2 multiscale approach for modelling the elastoviscoplastic behaviour of long fibre SiC/Ti composite materials.
    Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng. 2000;183(3-4):309-330.
34. Kouznetsova V, Brekelmans W, Baaijens F. An approach to micro-macro modeling of heterogeneous materials. Comput Mech.
    2001;27(1):37-48.
35. Geuzaine P, Brown G, Harris C, Farhat C. Aeroelastic dynamic analysis of a full F-16 configuration for various flight conditions. AIAA J.
    2003;41(3):363-371.
36. Klinkel S, Govindjee S. Using finite strain 3D-material models in beam and shell elements. Eng Comput. 2002;19(3):254-271.
37. Ying X. An overview of overfitting and its solutions. J Phys Conf Ser. 2019;1168:022022.
38. O’Farrell C, Sonneveldt BS, Karhgaard C, Tynis JA, Clark IG. Overview of the ASPIRE project’s supersonic flight tests of a strengthened
    DGB parachute. Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Aerospace Conference; 2019:1-18.
39. Ho J, Farhat C. Discrete embedded boundary method with smooth dependence on the evolution of a fluid-structure interface. Int J Numer
    Methods Eng. 2021;122(19):5353-5383.
40. Farhat C, Lakshminarayan VK. An ALE formulation of embedded boundary methods for tracking boundary layers in turbulent
    fluid–structure interaction problems. J Comput Phys. 2014;263:53-70.
41. Borker R, Huang D, Grimberg S, Farhat C, Avery P, Rabinovitch J. Mesh adaptation framework for embedded boundary methods for
    computational fluid dynamics and fluid-structure interaction. Int J Numer Methods Fluids. 2019;90(8):389-424.
42. Huang DZ, Wong ML, Lele SK, Farhat C. Homogenized flux-body force treatment of compressible viscous porous wall boundary
    conditions. AIAA J. 2021;59(6):2045-2059.
43. Farhat C, Rallu A, Wang K, Belytschko T. Robust and provably second-order explicit–explicit and implicit–explicit staggered
    time-integrators for highly non-linear compressible fluid–structure interaction problems. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2010;84(1):73-107.




   How to cite this article: As’ad F, Avery P, Farhat C. A mechanics-informed artificial neural network approach
   in data-driven constitutive modeling. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2022;123(12):2738-2759. doi: 10.1002/nme.6957
