                                        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


                                                            Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                             Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.
                                                    journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cma




A mechanics-informed deep learning framework for data-driven
nonlinear viscoelasticity
Faisal As’ad a ,∗, Charbel Farhat a,b,c
a Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America
c
    Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America



ARTICLE                  INFO                             ABSTRACT

Keywords:                                                 A mechanics-informed, data-driven framework for learning the constitutive law of a nonlinear
Constitutive modeling                                     viscoelastic material from stress–strain data using deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) is
Data-driven                                               proposed. In this framework, each ANN architecture is designed and its input and output are
Physics-informed
                                                          selected such that fundamental laws of mechanics and thermodynamics relevant to nonlinear
Thermodynamics
                                                          viscoelasticity are strongly satisfied by the resulting data-driven constitutive model. The
Viscoelasticity
Neural network
                                                          framework itself extends a previously developed mechanics-informed methodology for the data-
                                                          driven constitutive modeling of nonlinear elasticity to account for the dependence of the stress
                                                          on the entire strain history. It is grounded in an additive decomposition of the strain energy
                                                          density and an internal variable approach to viscoelasticity. Collectively, these are characterized
                                                          by three potentials whose ANN representations are taught the second law of thermodynamics,
                                                          various stability conditions, consistency (preservation of rigid body modes), and the recovery
                                                          of elastic limits. The proposed mechanics-informed deep learning framework for data-driven
                                                          nonlinear viscoelasticity is illustrated and its performance is assessed for one academic problem
                                                          where synthetic data is generated by a nonlinear convolution; a coupon-level application
                                                          associated with a multi-scale homogenization of a viscoelastic woven fabric material; and two
                                                          representative finite element analyses performed using the material law generated during the
                                                          previous application, to highlight different features of the framework.




1. Introduction

    Constitutive modeling of materials exhibiting a highly nonlinear behavior is among the most intensely researched fields within
solid mechanics, because of its complexity and importance for engineering problems [1]. The complexity is exacerbated when the
instantaneous stress depends not only on the instantaneous strain, but on the entire deformation history. Historically, constitutive
modeling has been performed using one of two main approaches: phenomenological modeling based on empirical observations [2–4];
and mechanistic modeling derived from first principles based on the material’s underlying structure [5,6].
    Phenomenological models are appealing (and often unavoidable) in the context of highly heterogeneous materials with complex
or even ambiguous micro-structures. However, they are subject to the usual shortcomings of empirical relationships. Namely,
they can violate some fundamental principles that govern the material they describe and typically require heuristic choices of
parameterized functions whose parameters are fitted. Furthermore, they can be sensitive to data sparsity or noise and can suffer
from overfitting. While mechanistic models avoid these problems, they are typically formulated on a material-by-material basis and


     ∗ Corresponding author.
       E-mail addresses: faisal3@stanford.edu (F. As’ad), cfarhat@stanford.edu (C. Farhat).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2023.116463
Received 8 August 2023; Received in revised form 16 September 2023; Accepted 16 September 2023
Available online 27 September 2023
0045-7825/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                               Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


their derivations can be infeasible for moderately complex materials. Hence, they cannot necessarily be constructed using a single,
comprehensive, modeling framework.
    With the advent of machine learning (ML), the use of deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) for constitutive modeling has
gained prominence. This is partly due to the universal approximation property of an ANN [7]; and to its fast online execution
speed. For these reasons, regression-based ANNs have been explored for constitutive modeling as early as in [8,9] and demonstrated
a strong potential. They have been applied to model kinematic hardening [10] and to generate implicit models for material
viscoplasticity [11]. In the absence of paired stress–strain training data, ANN frameworks have also been proposed for learning
constitutive relations from indirect observations [12]. With the emergence of automatic differentiation in ML, they have become even
more attractive, particularly in the context of constitutive modeling for finite element (FE) analysis and/or optimization, when the
computation of tangent modulus matrices and/or parameter sensitivities is required. ANN frameworks have also gained popularity
for accelerating the homogenization of nonlinear multi-scale FE computations [13–16].
    Nonetheless, ANNs are not without shortcomings for data-driven constitutive modeling. In their standard form, they are built to
simply map input data to output data — typically without fundamental restrictions. Thus, when such ANNs are exploited in a physics-
based numerical simulation, they can violate some laws of physics, in which case confidence in the simulation-based predictions is
reduced. Indeed, in the context of FE analysis, it was observed that purely regression-based constitutive models may lead to various
instabilities and nonphysical phenomena [17]. At least for this reason, the literature has witnessed most recently a surge of papers
proposing ML-based frameworks that attempt to inform or constrain ANNs with knowledge of mechanics and thermodynamics, in
view of robustifying their application to constitutive modeling [18–27]. In particular, the authors of [26] presented a method for
learning the behavior of an arbitrary dynamical system based on a two-potential graph ANN approach that is weakly constrained
to satisfy the second law of thermodynamics; those of [27] described a more general approach for inelastic constitutive modeling
that satisfies by design the second law of thermodynamics; and in [22], the authors of this paper, in collaboration with Philip
Avery, proposed a computational framework for data-driven constitutive modeling that is more broadly mechanics-informed, but
is limited to nonlinear elasticity. Unlike all aforementioned approaches, the framework proposed in [22] enforces on the ANN’s
network architecture a long list of desirable mathematical properties that guarantees the satisfaction of an even longer list of
physical constraints, including: objectivity; consistency (preservation of rigid body modes); dynamic stability; and material stability.
Furthermore, the authors of [22] have shown that embedding such notions in a learning approach reduces a model’s sensitivity
to noise and promotes its robustness to inputs outside the training domain. They have highlighted the merits of such a learning
approach using several FE analysis examples; and demonstrated its potential for ensuring the computational tractability of multi-
scale applications such as those associated with the fluid–structure simulation of the supersonic inflation dynamics of a parachute
system with a canopy made of a woven fabric.
    In this paper,1 the context is set specifically to viscoelasticity, where the instantaneous stress depends in general on the entire
strain history, but does not experience permanent deformations; and the aforementioned framework for data-driven constitutive
modeling [22] is extended to the viscoelastic setting to capture the time-dependent behavior of the material. To this end, general
mathematical restrictions on the functions arising in the development of a viscoelastic constitutive law are first derived. Next, the
adaptation of these restrictions to the construction of an ANN and its training using stress–strain data is described. Finally, the
ability of the resulting ANN to learn highly nonlinear viscoelastic material responses is demonstrated.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews the computational framework presented in [22] for
the mechanics-informed data-driven constitutive modeling of complex nonlinear elastic materials. The counterpart for nonlinear
viscoelastic materials proposed in this paper builds on that framework. Section 3 describes an internal variable approach to
viscoelasticity and derives the associated physics-based functional constraints. Section 4 presents a method for building this approach
into a set of ANNs where the constraints are treated as ‘‘hard’’ constraints; and for training these ANNs in a path-dependent setting.
Then, Section 5 demonstrates the ability of the resulting computational framework to learn nonlinear viscoelastic constitutive laws
generated by a synthetic model and a FE-based multi-scale homogenization of a woven fabric; and illustrates the merits of this
framework using two different FE representative analyses. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the most important findings of this work
and offers some conclusions.

2. Mechanics-informed artificial neural networks for elasticity

   The computational framework presented in [22] for building and training mechanics-informed data-driven ANNs for the
constitutive modeling of nonlinear elastic materials distinguishes itself from alternatives by the simultaneous enforcement, in a
computationally efficient manner, of the following mechanics-based hard constraints on the network architecture and loss function:

      • Dynamic stability. In the absence of any dissipative mechanism, preventing an uncontrolled growth of the kinetic energy of
        an elastic material requires such a material to be more precisely hyperelastic. That is, the stresses that may develop in the
        material must derive from a strain energy density function 𝑊 . This constraint is simply enforced by using the ANN to represent
        the strain energy density function rather than the stress. Consequently, the output of the ANN is chosen to be 𝑊 ; and the loss
        function is formulated in terms of the gradient of 𝑊 with respect to its input (determined below), rather than its output 𝑊 .


  1   A preliminary version of this paper appeared in the proceedings of the 2023 AIAA SciTech Forum and Exposition [28].


                                                                            2
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                    Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


      • Objectivity. To be objective, the strain energy density function 𝑊 should be invariant to orthogonal transformations of the
        frame of reference. To achieve this, 𝑊 must be expressible in terms of the Green–Lagrange strain 𝑬 ∈ Sym2𝑑 (R),2 where 𝑑 is
        the dimensionality of the problem (one-, two-, or three-dimensional). Consequently, the input to the ANN is chosen to be 𝑬.
        Since dynamic stability requires hyperelasticity, the output stress measure is chosen to be the energy conjugate of 𝑬 — that
        is, the second Piola Kirchhoff stress tensor 𝑺 ∈ Sym2𝑑 (R).
      • Material stability. Material stability characterizes a material which, under small loads, cannot experience arbitrarily large
        deformations. It is ensured by the ellipticity of 𝑊 (𝑭 ) — that is, the strain energy density function expressed in terms of the
        deformation gradient 𝑭 ∈ R𝑑×𝑑 — which itself is implied by the convexity of 𝑊 in the Green–Lagrange strain 𝑬 ∈ Sym2𝑑 (R),
        when the material is in a tensile state [22]. The convexity of 𝑊 (𝑬) leads to a symmetric positive definite elasticity tensor.
        Unlike that of 𝑊 (𝑭 ), which necessarily excludes the physically reasonable growth condition 𝑊 → ∞ as det 𝐅 → 0+ and
        prevents instability phenomena such as buckling (see [22]), the convexity of 𝑊 (𝑬) is not too restrictive. The convexity of
        the ANN representation of the output 𝑊 with respect to the input 𝑬 is enforced using the restrictions of Input Convex Neural
        Networks [29].
      • Consistency. In [22] and in this work, consistency refers to the preservation of rigid body modes. That is, a material
        undergoing zero strain should experience zero stress. This essential property is enforced by adding a linear correction to the
        ANN output 𝑊 whose slope is equal to the negative of the ANN gradient at the origin.

    Throughout the remainder of this paper, a hat over a symmetric second-order tensor such as stress or strain tensor represents
the vectorization of its unique components (for example, using the Voigt or Mendel notation). Hence, a nonlinear elastic material
is represented by
            ( )         ( ) 𝜕
             ̂ = 𝛩 𝑬     ̂ −     𝛩       ̂
       𝑊(𝛩) 𝑬                       (𝟎) ⋅ 𝑬
                                 ̂
                                𝜕𝑬
              ( ) 𝜕𝑊(𝛩) ( ) 𝜕 ( ) 𝜕
         ̂ (𝛩) 𝑬
               ̂ =       ̂ =   𝛩 ̂     𝛩
         𝑺               𝑬       𝑬 −     (𝟎)
                    ̂
                   𝜕𝑬         ̂
                             𝜕𝑬       ̂
                                     𝜕𝑬
                    ′
where 𝛩 ∶ R𝑑 → R is a fully-connected ANN parameterized by 𝛩 and 𝑑 ′ ≥ 𝑑 is the number of unique components of the stress
tensor — which depends on the dimensionality of the problem or the state of the stress/strain (for example, plane stress). Given
                            {( (𝑚) (𝑚) )}𝑁𝑚
𝑁𝑚 stress–strain data pairs   ̂ ,𝑺
                              𝑬   ̂         , the optimal values of the parameters 𝛩 are determined as
                                                     𝑚=1
                                ( (𝑚) )            2
                    𝑁𝑚 𝑑 ′ ⎛ 𝑆   ̂               ⎞
                                        − 𝑆̂𝑘(𝑚) ⎟
                    ∑  ∑ ⎜ ̂(𝜃)𝑘 𝑬
         𝛩 = argmin        ⎜       𝜎𝑘            ⎟
             𝜃∈R𝑁𝛩 𝑚=1 𝑘=1 ⎜                     ⎟
                           ⎝                     ⎠
where 𝜎𝑘 denotes the standard deviation of the 𝑘th component of the stress data and 𝑁𝛩 denotes the cardinality of 𝛩.
   In [22], the framework overviewed above was shown to favor learning the structure of a constitutive relation rather than
overfitting the training data; achieve robustness with respect to data sparsity and noise; promote numerical stability and accuracy for
inputs outside the training domain; outperform purely data-driven regression ANNs for complex nonlinear elastic problems; enable
the stable execution of static and dynamic FE analyses; and to massively accelerate multi-scale FE computations.

3. Constitutive modeling of nonlinear viscoelasticity

    Viscoelastic materials exhibit both viscous and elastic characteristics. Viscoelasticity manifests itself in a constitutive law through
two main mechanisms: strain-rate dependence; and hysteresis. Thus, unlike an elastic counterpart, a viscoelastic material law cannot
be represented by a function of the instantaneous strain only. Instead, it should be represented by a function which, at any time 𝑡,
depends on the entire strain history preceding 𝑡. For example, a candidate representation of the instantaneous second Piola Kirchhoff
stress tensor 𝑺 associated with a viscoelastic material is
                 (            )
        𝑺(𝑡) =  {𝑬(𝜏)}𝑡𝜏=−∞                                                                                                             (1)
                2
                  ( 0          )       2           0
where  ∶ Sym𝑑 𝐶 ((−∞, 𝑡]) → Sym𝑑 (R) and 𝐶 ((−∞, 𝑡]) denotes the set of time-continuous functions defined over the time interval
(−∞, 𝑡]. However, the above candidate representation is too general as it also applies to plastic, viscoplastic — and for that matter,
any other path-dependent material law. In other words, it is not sufficiently specific to characterize a viscoelastic material. Indeed,
unlike a plastic material (for example), a viscoelastic material experiences fading memory [30] and therefore does not experience
permanent deformations or residual stresses as a result of its strain history. Furthermore, the overly general representation (1)
poses difficulties to regression-based constitutive modeling. To begin, the number of inputs to the sought-after ANN-based model
associated with a time-discretization of the strain history – and thus, the number of model parameters – can be prohibitively large to
train the model. In addition, the online execution of a trained model – say, within a FE analysis – may require a significant amount
of data storage and CPU resources. Over and above all of this, a representation such as (1) is difficult to interpret and thus difficult
to inform with mechanics-based constraints.


  2   In this paper, the notation Sym𝑛𝑑 (S) is used to represent the set of symmetric 𝑑-dimensional 𝑛th order tensors defined over the set S.


                                                                                 3
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


    For all the above reasons, a more concise and yet sufficiently expressive representation of nonlinear viscoelasticity is sought after
in this paper. To this end, it is noted that it is tempting to achieve this objective by simply adding a strain-rate dependence to a
standard elastic model. However, that would fail to capture the relaxation effect commonly observed in viscoelastic materials. It is
also noted that a commonly used constitutive model for linear viscoelasticity is the standard linear solid (SLS) model, which draws
on the spring-dashpot analogy to account for both dependences on the stress rate and strain rate. This model leads to a parametric
linear relationship between the stress, strain, stress rate, and strain rate. Specifically, it consists of a first-order ordinary differential
equation (ODE) for the stress, in which the strain and strain rate appear as source terms. In the nonlinear setting however, a more
sophisticated model such as that proposed in this paper is required.


3.1. An internal variable approach to viscoelasticity

    Internal variable approaches [31] are most-appropriate for modeling hysteresis in a constitutive law, particularly in the
viscoelastic setting. They can lead to a concise regression model that is amenable to both the enforcement of hard mechanical
constraints and fast online execution. In such approaches, the stress 𝑺 can be expressed as a function of not only the strain 𝑬,
but also the time-evolving strain-like internal variable 𝜶 ∈ Sym2𝑑 (R). Here, such an approach is adopted and thus 𝑺 is modeled as
follows
               ̃
        𝑺(𝑡) = 𝑺(𝑬(𝑡), 𝜶(𝑡))                                                                                                                    (2)
      ̃ ∶ Sym2 (R) × Sym2 (R) → Sym2 (R).
where 𝑺        𝑑          𝑑           𝑑
  In (2), the evolution of the internal variable 𝜶 is governed by an ODE of the form

        𝜶(𝑡)
        ̇      ̃̇
             = 𝜶(𝜷(𝑡), 𝑬(𝑡))                                                                                                                    (3)

where a dot designates the time derivative; 𝜶̃̇ ∶ Sym2 (R)×Sym2 (R) → Sym2 (R) is some function of the ‘‘internal stress’’ 𝜷 ∈ Sym2 (R)
                                                     𝑑         𝑑            𝑑                                                     𝑑
and of 𝑬; and for closure, 𝜷 is related to the internal variable and to the strain by a relationship of the form
               ̃
        𝜷(𝑡) = 𝜷(𝜶(𝑡), 𝑬(𝑡))                                                                                                                    (4)

where 𝜷̃ ∶ Sym2𝑑 (R) × Sym2𝑑 (R) → Sym2𝑑 (R).
    The system of Eqs. (2) to (4) constitutes a well-defined constitutive law in the sense that, starting from an initial state (𝑬 0 , 𝜶 0 )
                                              (              )
specified at time 𝑡0 — that is, (𝑬 0 , 𝜶 0 ) = 𝑬(𝑡0 ), 𝜶(𝑡0 ) — this system can be advanced in time to obtain the instantaneous stress 𝑺(𝑡)
at any time 𝑡 ≥ 𝑡0 .

Remark 1. In order to keep the notation as simple as possible, the dependencies on time of 𝑬, 𝜶, and 𝜷 are not highlighted in
the remainder of this paper when they are irrelevant to the calculus being performed. The same convention is adopted, including
for other variables, except when detrimental to clarity. Similarly and for the same purpose, all dependencies of all functions and
functionals on their arguments are not highlighted within the narrative, except when detrimental to clarity.


3.2. Mechanics-informed constraints

   To complete the description of the viscoelastic constitutive model based on an internal variable approach outlined above, it
                                          ̃ 𝜶,
remains to determine the three functions 𝑺,  ̃̇ and 𝜷̃ that govern it. These should be chosen such that the resulting constitutive law
obeys well-established laws of mechanics.
   To guarantee objectivity and dynamic stability when 𝜶 is held constant (see Section 2 and/or [22]), the strain measure is chosen
again to be the Green–Lagrange strain 𝑬; the existence of an energy density function 𝑈 (𝑬, 𝜶) ∶ Sym2𝑑 (R)×Sym2𝑑 (R) → R is postulated;
and the energy-conjugate second Piola Kirchhoff 𝑺 is assumed to derive from the energy density. It follows that the stress function
̃ in (2) is restricted to the form
𝑺
        ̃ (𝑬, 𝜶) = 𝜕𝑈 (𝑬, 𝜶)
        𝑺                                                                                                                                       (5)
                   𝜕𝑬
    Additional hard constraints particularly relevant to viscoelasticity are discussed next.


3.2.1. Hyperelasticity of the internal stress
    As shown in [22] and recalled in Section 2, hyperelasticity guarantees the dynamic stability of elastic materials, as it results in
a stress field that prevents the accumulation of infinite kinetic energy during a cyclic deformation process. For this reason and by
analogy, the internal stress function 𝜷 along a constant 𝑬 is required here to derive from the energy density function 𝑈 — that is,

        ̃           𝜕𝑈
        𝜷(𝜶, 𝑬) = −    (𝑬, 𝜶)                                                                                                                   (6)
                    𝜕𝜶
    In (6) above, the negative sign is introduced for the convenience of the formulation next of additional hard constraints.

                                                                      4
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                                        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


3.2.2. Stability of the evolution of the internal variable
    The solution of the ODE (3), which, together with (4), govern the evolution of the internal variable 𝜶, must be stable. That is,
in the absence of any source term, the time-trajectories of 𝜶 should not change significantly under small perturbations; otherwise,
it would be possible to prescribe some strain history for which 𝜶 or the energy of an isolated viscoelastic material would grow
unbounded. Moreover, since hysteresis in a viscoelastic material necessarily dies away after a sufficiently long time, any perturbation
of 𝜶 must strictly decay in time to zero.
                                                                                             (       )
    Consider now the linearization of the ODE (3) about a state defined at time 𝑡⋆ by 𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ and let 𝜷 ⋆ = 𝜷(𝜶      ̃ ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ). If the
                                                   (       )
obtained linearized ODE is stable at all points 𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ , the underlying nonlinear ODE is stable throughout its domain of definition.
Specifically, let 𝛥𝜶 = 𝜶 − 𝜶 ⋆ and 𝛥𝑬 = 𝑬 − 𝑬 ⋆ . From Eqs. (3) to (5), it follows that the linearization of the time-derivative of 𝛥𝜶
       (        )
about 𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ — for which 𝜷 ⋆ = 𝜷(𝜶  ̃ ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) — can be written as
                                         ̃ (        )              ̃ (       )
         ̇
        𝛥𝜶(𝑡)
        Ø     = 𝜶(𝑡)
                ̇      ̃̇ ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) + 𝜕 𝜶̇ 𝜷 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ∶ 𝛥𝜶(𝑡) + 𝜕 𝜶̇ 𝜷 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ∶ 𝛥𝑬(𝑡)
                     = 𝜶(𝜷
                                      𝜕𝜶                         𝜕𝑬
                                         ̃ (        ) 𝜕 𝜷̃ (         )           ̃̇ (       )
                       ̃̇ ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) + 𝜕 𝜶̇ 𝜷 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ∶
                     = 𝜶(𝜷                                   𝜶 , 𝑬 ∶ 𝛥𝜶(𝑡) +
                                                                                𝜕𝜶
                                                                                      𝜷 , 𝑬 ∶ 𝛥𝑬(𝑡)
                                      𝜕𝜷               𝜕𝜶 ⋆ ⋆                   𝜕𝑬 ⋆ ⋆
                                         ̃ (        )   2    (         )            ̃ (       )
                       ̃̇ ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) − 𝜕 𝜶̇ 𝜷 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ∶ 𝜕 𝑈 𝑬 ⋆ , 𝜶 ⋆ ∶ 𝛥𝜶(𝑡) + 𝜕 𝜶̇ 𝜷 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ∶ 𝛥𝑬(𝑡)
                     = 𝜶(𝜷
                                      𝜕𝜷               𝜕𝜶 2                      𝜕𝑬
                     = 𝒄 ⋆ − 𝑯(𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) ∶ 𝛥𝜶(𝑡) + 𝑹(𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) ∶ 𝛥𝑬(𝑡)
where
                                                      ̃̇ (
                                                     𝜕𝜶             ) 𝜕2 𝑈                                              ̃̇ (
                                                                                                                       𝜕𝜶              )
              ̃̇ ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ),
        𝒄 ⋆ = 𝜶(𝜷                   𝑯(𝜶, 𝑬) =              ̃
                                                          𝜷(𝜶, 𝑬), 𝑬 ∶      (𝑬, 𝜶) ,                   𝑹(𝜶, 𝑬) =             ̃
                                                                                                                            𝜷(𝜶, 𝑬), 𝑬
                                                     𝜕𝜷                𝜕𝜶 2                                            𝜕𝑬
                                                                                                                     (         )
and the operator ∶ acting on two tensors denotes their double contraction. Hence, the linearized version of (3) about 𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ is
the linear ODE
         ̇
        𝛥𝜶(𝑡)
        Ø     + 𝑯(𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) ∶ 𝛥𝜶(𝑡) − 𝑹(𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) ∶ 𝛥𝑬(𝑡) = 𝒄 ⋆                                                                                                             (7)

whose solution is
                                                                     𝑡
        𝛥𝜶(𝑡) = 𝑒−(𝑡−𝑡⋆ )𝑯(𝜶⋆ ,𝑬 ⋆ ) ∶ 𝜶 ⋆ + 𝒄 ⋆ 𝑡 +           𝑒−(𝑡−𝜏)𝑯(𝜶⋆ ,𝑬 ⋆ ) ∶ 𝑹(𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ) ∶ 𝛥𝑬(𝜏) d𝜏                                                                    (8)
                ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟           ∫𝑡⋆
                 homogeneous solution         ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
                                                                                 particular solution

    It is possible that when the homogeneous solution highlighted in (8) is unstable and 𝒄 ⋆ = 𝟎, the part of the particular solution
                                                                                                                    (       )
driven by 𝛥𝑬 can stabilize the overall solution locally — that is, in the neighborhood of the linearization point 𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ for which
       ̃ ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ). However, in the general case where 𝛥𝑬 is associated with an arbitrary strain history, the solution (8) of the linear
𝜷 ⋆ = 𝜷(𝜶
ODE (7) must be locally stable for any 𝛥𝑬, including 𝛥𝑬 = 𝟎. It follows that the homogeneous solution must be stable and therefore
should not exhibit any exponential growth, which implies that the tensor 𝑯 must have positive eigenvalues at all points (𝜶 ⋆ , 𝑬 ⋆ ).
Noting that the product of two symmetric positive definite (SPD) tensors has positive eigenvalues, it suffices then to require that
                                   ̃̇
                                  𝜕𝜶
𝑈 (𝑬, 𝜶) be convex in 𝜶 and that      be SPD to ensure that 𝑯 has positive eigenvalues. Therefore, it is required here that: 𝑈 (𝑬, 𝜶)
                                  𝜕𝜷
be convex in 𝜶; and there exists some functional 𝐺 ∶ Sym2𝑑 (R) × Sym2𝑑 (R) → R that is convex in its first argument and such that

        ̃̇ (𝜷, 𝑬) = 𝜕𝐺 (𝜷, 𝑬)
        𝜶                                                                                                                                                                       (9)
                    𝜕𝜷

3.2.3. Clausius–Duhem form of the second law of thermodynamics
    The Clausius–Duhem inequality – which is one way of expressing the second law of thermodynamics – states that the dissipation
in a material, denoted here by 𝛯, must be non-negative. Ignoring the effects of heat flow and thus assuming an adiabatic dissipation,
this inequality can be written as
                  ̃
        𝛯(𝑬, 𝜶) = 𝑺(𝑬, 𝜶) ∶ 𝑬̇ − 𝑈̇ (𝑬, 𝜶) ≥ 0                                                                                                                                 (10)

Expanding in (10) the energy-rate term and recalling (5), (6), and (9) transforms the above inequality into

      ̃              𝜕𝑈               𝜕𝑈                 𝜕𝑈                         𝜕𝐺 ( ̃        )
     𝑺(𝑬,  𝜶) ∶ 𝑬̇ −    (𝑬, 𝜶) ∶ 𝑬̇ −    (𝑬, 𝜶) ∶ 𝜶̇ = −                  ̃
                                                            (𝑬, 𝜶) ∶ 𝜶̇ = 𝜷(𝜶, 𝑬) ∶     𝜷(𝜶, 𝑬), 𝑬 ≥ 0                                                                         (11)
                     𝜕𝑬               𝜕𝜶                 𝜕𝜶                         𝜕𝜷
Hence, the second law of thermodynamics poses a direct restriction on the properties of the potential functional 𝐺.
   To find a class of functions that satisfy the hard inequality constraint (11), it is noted that for all convex functions 𝑓 of a tensor
𝒙 and all (𝒂, 𝒃) ∈ Dom(𝑓 ) × Dom(𝑓 )
                      𝜕𝑓
        𝑓 (𝒂) ≥ 𝑓 (𝒃) +   (𝒃) ∶ (𝒂 − 𝒃)
                      𝜕𝒙
In particular, for 𝒃 = 0,
        𝜕𝑓
           (𝒂) ∶ 𝒂 ≥ 𝑓 (𝒂) − 𝑓 (𝟎)                                                                                                                                             (12)
        𝜕𝒙

                                                                                                  5
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


Since 𝐺 was restricted in Section 3.2.2 to be convex in its argument 𝜷, it follows from (12) (with 𝑓 = 𝐺, 𝒙 = 𝜷 and 𝒂 = 𝜷) that
restricting 𝐺 further to satisfy for all values of 𝑬

        min 𝐺(𝜷, 𝑬) ≥ 𝐺(𝟎, 𝑬)                                                                                                                 (13)
          𝜷

ensures that the hard inequality constraint (11) will be satisfied for all values of 𝑬, 𝜶, and 𝜷.
   Consequently, 𝐺 is furthermore required here to satisfy (13).

3.2.4. Consistency
    As reminded in Sections 1 and 2, consistency refers in this paper to the preservation of rigid body modes. Hence, consistency
is equivalent to stating that a body that undergoes a rigid motion should not experience any deformation, which is equivalent to
stating that when both the strain 𝑬 and internal variable 𝜶 are zero, the stress 𝑺 should also be zero. In other words,
        ̃ 𝟎) = 𝜕𝑈 (𝟎, 𝟎) = 𝟎
       𝑺(𝟎,                                                                                                                                   (14)
                  𝜕𝑬
In this case, the internal stress (not to be confused with an initial or residual stress) should also be zero — that is,
       ̃ 𝟎) = − 𝜕𝑈 (𝟎, 𝟎) = 𝟎
       𝜷(𝟎,                                                                                                                                   (15)
                  𝜕𝜶
Finally, in the absence of any internal stress, the internal variable should not evolve; therefore,

        ̃̇        𝜕𝐺
        𝜶(𝟎, 𝑬) =    (𝟎, 𝑬) = 𝟎                                                                                                               (16)
                  𝜕𝜷
From (3) and (4), it follows that the above conditions guarantee that if 𝑬 is identically zero and the state of a viscoelastic material
starts from a zero initial condition (𝜶 0 = 𝟎), then: 𝜶(𝑡) = 𝟎 for all 𝑡 ≥ 𝑡0 ; and the material does not experience any stress or internal
stress. Therefore, Eqs. (14) to (16) are identified here as additional hard constraints.
    Note that from Eq. (16), it follows that 𝜷 = 𝟎 is an extremum point of the potential functional 𝐺. Hence, if 𝐺 is convex in 𝜷 as
required in Section 3.2.2, this extremum point is a minimum point with a value of 𝟎. It follows that when 𝐺 is convex in 𝜷, the
hard constraint (16) implies the hard constraint (13).

3.2.5. Recovery of elasticity
    In [32,33], it was suggested that a viscoelastic material should experience hysteresis only at intermediate strain rates; in the
limit of infinitely slow or infinitely fast deformations, it should recover an elastic behavior and thus its constitutive law should
be expressible purely in terms of the instantaneous strain. In the limit of infinitely slow deformations, where the time-scale of
the prescribed strain is much longer than the natural time-scale of viscoelasticity, the response to a quasi-static loading should be
recovered (the decay of the transients ensured by the stability condition discussed in Section 3.2.2 promote the existence of such a
                                                                                                     𝜕𝐺
response). Hence, in the limit of infinitely slow deformations, 𝜶̇ → 𝟎; which, from (9), implies         → 𝟎.
                                                                                                     𝜕𝜷
    In Section 3.2.2, 𝐺 was restricted to be convex in 𝜷 and in Section 3.2.4, it was restricted to satisfy for all values of 𝑬,
 𝜕𝐺
     (𝟎, 𝑬) = 𝟎. With these restrictions, 𝜷 = 0 is the only stationary point of 𝐺 in its first argument and therefore,
 𝜕𝜷
        𝜕𝐺
           (𝜷, 𝑬) = 𝟎, ∀𝑬     ⇔       𝜷=𝟎
        𝜕𝜷
Hence, the quasi-static limit (𝜶̇ → 𝟎) is reached only for 𝜷 → 𝟎. In order to ensure the recovery of the elastic stress in this limit,
the viscous part of the stress should vanish when 𝜷 vanishes. To this end, consider the additive decomposition of the strain energy
density function into elastic (equilibrium) and viscoelastic (non-equilibrium) components

        𝑈 (𝑬, 𝜶) = 𝑊 (𝑬) + 𝑉 (𝑬, 𝜶)                                                                                                           (17)
where 𝑊 ∶ Sym2𝑑 (R) → R denotes the elastic component and 𝑉 ∶ Sym2𝑑 (R) × Sym2𝑑 (R) → R denotes the viscoelastic component. The
                                                                                                                   𝜕𝑊
same constraints summarized in Section 2 are imposed on 𝑊 (essentially, the convexity of 𝑊 in 𝑬 and                    (𝟎) = 𝟎), so that the
                                                                                                                    𝜕𝑬
material behavior is physical in the quast-static limit. On the other hand, the viscoelastic energy 𝑉 is required to be convex in 𝜶,
as established in Section 3.2.2.
    To satisfy the quasi-static limit, 𝑉 (𝑬, 𝜶) is further restricted here to the set of functions satisfying (see (17))
      ̃           𝜕𝑈             𝜕𝑉              𝜕𝑉
      𝜷(𝜶, 𝑬) = −     (𝑬, 𝜶) = −    (𝑬, 𝜶) = 𝟎 ⇒    (𝑬, 𝜶) = 𝟎                                                            (18)
                  𝜕𝜶             𝜕𝜶              𝜕𝑬
Accordingly, the class of functions depending only on an affine combination of 𝑬 and 𝜶, rather than on 𝑬 and 𝜶 individually, is
proposed

        𝑉 (𝑬, 𝜶) = 𝑉̃ (C1 ∶ 𝑬 + C2 ∶ 𝜶 + 𝑩 ) = 𝑉̃ (𝜹)                                                                                         (19)
                       ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
                                  𝜹

where C1 , C2 ∈ Sym4𝑑 (R) are symmetric fourth-order tensors, 𝑩 ∈ Sym2𝑑 (R) is a constant, and the variable 𝜹 ∈ Sym2𝑑 (R) is introduced
for the sake of convenience. The partial derivatives of the potential 𝑉 with respect to its arguments are
        𝜕𝑉   𝜕𝜹 𝜕 𝑉̃        𝜕 𝑉̃
           =    ∶    = C1 ∶
        𝜕𝑬   𝜕𝑬   𝜕𝜹        𝜕𝜹

                                                                     6
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                       Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


and
        𝜕𝑉   𝜕𝜹 𝜕 𝑉̃        𝜕 𝑉̃
           =    ∶    = C2 ∶
        𝜕𝜶   𝜕𝜶   𝜕𝜹        𝜕𝜹
                                                                    𝜕𝑉               𝜕 𝑉̃                            𝜕𝑉
From the above, it follows that as long as C2 is non-singular,          = 𝟎 implies       = 𝟎, which in turn implies    = 𝟎. Moreover, if 𝑉̃
                                                                    𝜕𝜶               𝜕𝜹                              𝜕𝑬
is convex in 𝜹, the convexity of 𝑉 in 𝜶 is maintained because composition with an affine function preserves convexity. Additionally,
   𝜕 𝑉̃
if      (𝟎) = 𝟎 and 𝑩 = 𝟎 is chosen, then Eq. (15) is satisfied.
    𝜕𝜹
     In the limit of infinitely fast deformations, the time-scale of the prescribed strain is much shorter than the characteristic time-scale
of a viscoelastic material and therefore the internal variable does not have time to evolve. Thus, in this limit, 𝜶 = 𝟎. This implies
that the strain energy density (17), and thus the stress, is a function of the strain only — that is,
                                      ̃ (𝑬)
        𝑈 (𝑬, 𝟎) = 𝑊 (𝑬) + 𝑉 (𝑬, 𝟎) = 𝑊
                                                     ̃ as a whole, rather than just 𝑊 , must be subject to the same hard constraints
which corresponds to a hyperelastic behavior. Hence, 𝑊
of a nonlinear elastic material overviewed in Section 2. This is ensured by the form of 𝑉 chosen in (19), as convexity in 𝜹 implies
convexity in 𝑬, 𝑉 vanishes when 𝜶 = 𝑬 = 𝟎, and hence the elastic limit is recovered in this case.

Remark 2. While Eq. (19) implies Eq. (18), the converse is not true. Indeed, Eq. (19) represents only a particular family of functions
that satisfy Eq. (18). Nonetheless, this form is chosen here for two reasons. First, finding the most general family of function that
satisfy Eq. (18) is a nontrivial task. Second, the choice of functional form described in Eq. (19) eases the enforcement of the convexity
of 𝑉 by simply enforcing the convexity of 𝑉̃ .

3.3. Summary

    To summarize, Sections 3.1 and 3.2 described a three-potential framework grounded in the laws of mechanics that is proposed
in this paper for modeling viscoelasticity. The general constitutive law generated by this framework is governed by three potentials
𝑊 , 𝑉 , and 𝐺; associated restrictions on their functional properties; and the following set of equations
               𝜕𝑊            𝜕𝑉
        𝑺(𝑡) =     (𝑬(𝑡)) +      (𝑬(𝑡), 𝜶(𝑡))                                                                                        (20)
               𝜕𝑬            𝜕𝑬
               𝜕𝐺
       𝜶(𝑡)
        ̇   =     (𝜷(𝑡), 𝑬(𝑡))                                                                                                       (21)
               𝜕𝜷
                𝜕𝑉
       𝜷(𝑡) = −     (𝑬(𝑡), 𝜶(𝑡))                                                                                                     (22)
                𝜕𝜶
    Eqs. (20) to (22) form a closed system that, given at 𝑡0 an initial condition (𝑬 0 , 𝜶 0 ) and given a prescribed strain history 𝑬(𝑡),
can be integrated forward in time to determine the stress at any time 𝑡 ≥ 𝑡0 . The three potentials 𝑊 , 𝑉 , and 𝐺 are constrained as
follows:
                          𝜕𝑊
    • 𝑊 is convex and          (𝟎) = 𝟎.
                          𝜕𝑬
                                                                                                        𝜕 𝑉̃
    • 𝑉 = 𝑉̃ (C1 ∶ 𝑬 + C2 ∶ 𝜶), where 𝑉̃ is convex in 𝜹 = C1 ∶ 𝑬 + C2 ∶ 𝜶, C2 is non-singular, and           (𝟎) = 𝟎.
                                                                                                        𝜕𝜹
                               𝜕𝐺
    • 𝐺 is convex in 𝜷, and        (𝟎, 𝑬) = 𝟎.
                               𝜕𝜷
    The above restrictions are not inherent to the proposed framework. Instead, some are necessary conditions but others are only
sufficient conditions for achieving stability, satisfying the second law of thermodynamics, capturing the correct material behavior
in the limits of infinitely slow and infinitely fast deformations, and preserving rigid body modes.
    To completely determine the constitutive law of viscoelasticity resulting from the framework outlined above, one could propose
further expressions for 𝑊 , 𝑉 , and 𝐺; and identify experimentally any associated constants, including those defining the fourth-order
tensors C1 and C2 . Instead, it is proposed here to learn all these quantities in a data-driven approach, using ANNs that enforce hard
constraints.

Remark 3. At this point, it is noted that the two-potential approaches for constructing ANNs that model viscoelasticity recently
proposed in [26,27] enforce the second law of thermodynamics, weakly and strongly, respectively. On the other hand, the alternative
approach proposed in this work, which requires three rather than two potentials and constrains them to satisfy strongly the set of
mathematical properties outlined above, enforces on an ANN the longer list of constraints discussed in Section 3.2 to make it truly
mechanics-informed. Hence, this approach constitutes a significant advancement of the state of the art of mechanics-informed deep
learning for data-driven nonlinear viscoelasticity.

4. Learning nonlinear viscoelasticity using deep artificial neural networks

4.1. Data-driven modeling a nonlinear viscoelastic material using deep artificial neural networks

    Three ANNs are introduced here: 𝛩 parameterized by 𝛩 to learn the potential 𝑊 ; 𝛷 parameterized by 𝛷 to learn the potential
𝑉 ; and 𝛤 parameterized by 𝛤 to learn the potential 𝐺. Each of these is forced to be convex with respect to its appropriate input(s)

                                                                     7
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                              Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


— as per the requirements identified in Section 3.3 — by altering the architecture of the ANN as in [29]. The alteration involves,
among others, adopting SoftplusSquared activation functions as these have desirable properties that are discussed in [22].
  Specifically, each of the aforementioned potentials is represented by its ANN as follows:

     • Elastic component 𝑊 of the strain energy density function 𝑈
                  ( )      ( ) 𝜕
                   ̂ = 𝛩 𝑬  ̂ −       𝛩       ̂
              𝑊(𝛩) 𝑬                     (𝟎) ⋅ 𝑬                                                                                                     (23)
                                      ̂
                                     𝜕𝑬
       where 𝛩 is convex.
     • Viscoelastic component 𝑉 of 𝑈
                  (     )      (             ) 𝜕          (               )
                    ̂ 𝜶̂ = 𝛷 𝑪 1 𝑬̂ + 𝑪 2 𝜶̂ −     𝛷           ̂ + 𝑪 2 𝜶̂
             𝑉(𝛷) 𝑬,                                  (𝟎) ⋅ 𝑪 1 𝑬                                                                                    (24)
                                                𝜕 𝜹̂
       where 𝛷 is convex in 𝜹̂ = 𝑪 1 𝑬̂ + 𝑪 2 𝜶,
                                               ̂ 𝑪 1 and 𝑪 2 are the counterparts of C1 and C2 , respectively, that are compatible with
                                                                                                 ′  ′
       the algebra for quantities written using the Voigt notation — specifically, 𝑪 1 , 𝑪 2 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 and 𝑪 2 is non-singular. Since 𝑪 1
       and 𝑪 2 parameterize the potential 𝑉(𝛷) , they are included in the set of parameters 𝛷 as this simplifies the notation.
     • Dissipation potential 𝐺 associated with the evolution of the strain-like internal variable 𝜶
                   (     )      (     ) 𝜕 (         )
                     ̂ 𝑬
                       ̂ = 𝛤 𝜷,  ̂ 𝑬
                                    ̂ −       𝛤    ̂ ⋅ 𝜷̂
              𝐺(𝛤 ) 𝜷,                          𝟎, 𝑬                                                                                                 (25)
                                          𝜕 𝜷̂
                             ̂
       where 𝛤 is convex in 𝜷.

As such, the representations (23) to (25) ensure that the generated material law satisfies all restrictions derived in Section 3.
From (2), (20), and these representations, it follows that the stress predicted by the above ANN-based models is parameterized
by (𝛩, 𝛷, 𝛤 ) and can be written as
                                  (                   ) 𝜕𝑊(𝛩) (     ) 𝜕𝑉(𝛷) (                   )
                        ̂
       ̂ (𝛩,𝛷,𝛤 ) (𝑡) = 𝑺
                        ̃ (𝛩,𝛷,𝛤 ) 𝑬(𝑡),
                                    ̂                           ̂             ̂
       𝑺                                 𝜶̂ (𝛷,𝛤 ) (𝑡) =       𝑬(𝑡)  +       𝑬(𝑡), 𝜶̂ (𝛷,𝛤 ) (𝑡)                             (26)
                                                          ̂
                                                         𝜕𝑬             ̂
                                                                       𝜕𝑬
where 𝜶̂ evolves as
                       𝜕𝐺(𝛤 ) (                    )
      𝜶̂̇ (𝛷,𝛤 ) (𝑡) =          𝜷̂ (𝛷,𝛤 ) (𝑡), 𝑬(𝑡)
                                               ̂                                                                                                     (27)
                         ̂
                        𝜕𝜷
and the internal stress tensor is determined as
                         𝜕𝑉(𝛷) (                    )
       𝜷̂ (𝛷,𝛤 ) (𝑡) = −         ̂
                                 𝑬(𝑡), 𝜶̂ (𝛷,𝛤 ) (𝑡)                                                                            (28)
                          𝜕 𝜶̂
   In practice, given a time-dependent strain history, one predicts the corresponding time-dependent stress by discretizing Eq. (27)
using any preferred time-integration scheme and advancing the prediction forward in time recursively. In the context of a FE
simulation, each time-step requires evaluating each of Eqs. (26) to (28) once and storing the internal variable for use in the
subsequent time-step.

4.2. Training the model parameters
                                                                     {{(                          )}𝑁𝑚 }𝑁𝑝
    Given 𝑁𝑝 sets of conjugate stress–strain time-histories                   ̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 ), 𝑺
                                                                              𝑬          ̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 )         along different strain paths, the ANN
                                                                                               𝑚=1    𝑝=1
representations (23) to (25) can be trained as usual — that is, by computing values of the model parameters that minimize the
least square error between the stress data and the predicted model stress (26), which can be written as
                                                             ( 𝑝                 )              2
                                         𝑁𝑝 𝑁𝑚 𝑑 ′ ⎛ 𝑺 ̂      ̂ (𝑡𝑚 ), 𝜶̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 ) − 𝑆̂𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 ) ⎞
                                         ∑   ∑ ∑ ⎜ ̃ (𝜃,𝜙,𝛾)𝑘 𝑬           (𝜙,𝛾)       𝑘       ⎟
        (𝛩, 𝛷, 𝛤 ) =        argmin                   ⎜                                        ⎟                                                      (29)
                     𝜃,𝜙,𝛾∈R𝑁𝛩 ×R𝑁𝛷 ×R𝑁𝛤 𝑝=1 𝑚=1 𝑘=1 ⎜                 𝜎𝑘                     ⎟
                                                     ⎝                                        ⎠
In (29) above, 𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝜙,𝛾) (𝑡𝑚 ) can be determined at each training epoch by time-integrating Eq. (27) — for example, using the
computationally economical forward Euler scheme, in which case at each time-step 𝑡𝑚 ,
                                                𝜕𝐺(𝛾) ( 𝑝                           )
      𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝜙,𝛾) (𝑡𝑚 ) = 𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝜙,𝛾) (𝑡𝑚−1 ) + 𝛥𝑡𝑚                          ̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚−1 )
                                                       𝜷̂ (𝜙,𝛾) (𝑡𝑚−1 ), 𝑬                                               (30)
                                                 𝜕 𝜷̂
and from (28),
           𝑝                   𝜕𝑉(𝜙) ( 𝑝                     )
        𝜷̂ (𝜙,𝛾) (𝑡𝑚−1 ) = −          ̂ (𝑡𝑚−1 ), 𝜶̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚−1 )
                                      𝑬                                                                                                              (31)
                                𝜕 𝜶̂                (𝜙,𝛾)

   In the standard training procedure outlined above, each discrete value of the internal variable 𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝜙,𝛾) (𝑡𝑚 ) depends on all its
counterparts at earlier times. Consequently, the loss function in (29) cannot be decomposed as the sum of independent terms and
hence its evaluation and that of its gradients cannot be parallelized. Moreover, the training data cannot be batched and therefore

                                                                          8
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


prominent algorithms such as the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) method cannot be used to determine the optimal values of the
model parameters. Furthermore, evaluating the gradients of the loss function in (29) at time 𝑡𝑚 requires in this case propagating
the gradients of the ANNs all the way to time 𝑡0 . Hence, it is vulnerable to the vanishing gradient problem that recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) suffer from [34] and is computationally intensive. Hence, for all these reasons, the standard training procedure
defined by (29) to (31) is computationally intractable.
    Therefore, it is proposed here instead to enforce the evolution of the internal variable 𝜶̂ 𝑝 corresponding to the training strain
path 𝑝 in differential form within an augmented loss function; represent it for this purpose by a surrogate model 𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝛹 ) (𝑡) constructed
using an auxiliary ANN 𝑝𝛹 parameterized by 𝛹 ; and enforce 𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝛹 ) (𝑡0 ) = 𝜶̂ 0 by performing the surrogate representation specifically
as follows
        𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝛹 ) (𝑡) = 𝑝𝛹 (𝑡) − 𝑝𝛹 (𝑡0 ) + 𝜶̂ 0
This leads to the alternative training procedure
                                                                    ( 𝑝                  )                2
                                            𝑁𝑝 𝑁𝑚 𝑑 ′ ⎡⎛ 𝑺 ̂          ̂ (𝑡𝑚 ), 𝜶̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 ) − 𝑆̂𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 ) ⎞
                                            ∑   ∑ ∑ ⎢⎜ ̃ (𝜃,𝜙,𝛾)𝑘 𝑬               (𝜓)            𝑘      ⎟
        (𝛩, 𝛷, 𝛤 , 𝛹 ) =       argmin                   ⎢⎜                    𝜎𝑘                        ⎟
                                𝜃,𝜙,𝛾,𝜓∈
                                            𝑝=1 𝑚=1 𝑘=1 ⎢⎜                                              ⎟
                         R𝑁𝛩 ×R𝑁𝛷 ×R𝑁𝛤 ×R𝑁𝛹             ⎣⎝                                              ⎠                                              (32)
                                                           ( 𝑝                                                 )
                                                             d𝛼̂ (𝜓)𝑘 ( ) 𝜕𝐺(𝛾)       (                  𝑝
                                                                                                              ) 2⎤
                                                     + 𝜆𝑘              𝑡𝑚 −             ̂ 𝑝
                                                                                                       ̂
                                                                                        𝜷 (𝜙,𝜓) (𝑡𝑚 ), 𝑬 (𝑡𝑚 )   ⎥
                                                                d𝑡              𝜕 𝛽̂𝑘                            ⎥
                                                                                                                 ⎦
where 𝜆𝑘 ∈ R+ are penalty parameters chosen as described in Appendix and, in view of (28),
          𝑝               𝜕𝑉(𝜙) ( 𝑝                 )
       𝜷̂ (𝜙,𝜓) (𝑡𝑚 ) = −        ̂ (𝑡𝑚 ), 𝜶̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 )
                                 𝑬                                                                                             (33)
                           𝜕 𝜶̂              (𝜓)

Unlike the standard training procedure, the alternative one outlined above and equipped with the algorithm described in Appendix
for determining the penalty parameters 𝜆𝑘 ∈ R+ is amenable to parallelization and batch data processing. Furthermore, it avoids the
deep propagation of ANN gradients. This alternative training procedure is not only computationally tractable, but also fast. Most
importantly, it has proved in numerous tests to be robust.

Remark 4. The internal variable 𝜶̂ 𝑝 corresponding to the training strain path 𝑝 is represented by the ANN-based surrogate model
𝜶̂ 𝑝(𝛹 ) only during the offline training procedure. Online, the trained viscoelastic constitutive model is evaluated using Eqs. (26) to (28)
which treat all mechanics-informed constraints as hard constraints.

4.3. Generation of strain paths

    Unlike the stress response of an elastic material, that of a viscoelastic one can be highly dependent on the strain path it
experiences. Therefore, it is important to train the model to be generated on strain paths that represent well the possible strain
time-histories and can influence the response of the material. Here, such paths are generated stochastically using the two-step
approach described below.
    In Step 1, 𝐾 vectorized strain data points are generated in a time-interval [𝑡0 , 𝑇𝑓 ] using the random walk approach described
in [35], as follows
                        √
          (𝑖+1)     (𝑖)    𝑇𝑓
        ̂
       𝑬𝐼         ̂
                = 𝑬𝐼 +         𝝂,    𝑖 = 0, … , 𝐾 − 1                                                                         (34)
                          𝐾 −1
                     ′                    ′
where 𝑬̂ 𝐼 ∈ R𝑑 , 𝝂 ∈ [−1, 1]𝑑 is a vector of uniform random variables,  is a parameter controlling the step-size of the random
walk, 𝑇𝑓 denotes the final time of the strain path, and the subscript 𝐼 designates the 𝐾 points as interpolation data. Here, 𝑬   ̂ (0) = 𝑬
                                                                                                                                         ̂0
                                                                                                                                   𝐼
                                                     ̂   ̂
is chosen. Typically, the relevant strain range [𝑬 min , 𝑬 max ] is known a priori, in which case it is desirable that the generated strain
paths do not exceed its bounds.
    Therefore, noting that any randomly generated vectorized strain data point must be such that the squares of the principal stretches
– which are given by the eigenvalues of 2𝑬 + 𝑰 – are positive, the random walk generator (34) is adapted next so that: (a) each
generated data point 𝑬  ̂ (𝑖) is interpreted as a candidate data point; and (b) this candidate point is tested for acceptance/rejection
                          𝐼
using the condition
            (                  ) (                  ) (    ( (               ))      )
               (𝑖+1)                  (𝑖+1)
       ∃𝑗 ∶ 𝐸𝐼𝑗      > 𝐸max,𝑗 ∨ 𝐸𝐼𝑗         < 𝐸min,𝑗 ∨ min eig 2𝑬 𝐼(𝑖+1) + 𝑰    ≤0                                                     (35)

where eig(†) denotes the set of eigenvalues of the matrix †. If the above condition is satisfied, 𝝂 is redrawn randomly and the current
step of the random walk is repeated until condition (35) is not satisfied (effectively, this amounts to placing reflecting boundaries
on the lower and upper limits of the feasible strain range).
    In Step 2, the 𝐾 vectorized strain data points generated as described above are interpolated using piecewise Hermite polynomials
— that is, one Hermite interpolant for each two successive data points 𝑬     ̂ (𝑖) and 𝑬
                                                                                       ̂ (𝑖+1) . This ensures that a strain path generated using
                                                                               𝐼         𝐼
a coarse random walk is sufficiently smooth and differentiable. Finally, such a generated strain path is sampled at 𝑁𝑚 vectorized
                                                                                                             𝑇𝑓
strain data points in the time-interval [𝑡0 , 𝑇𝑓 ] using a sampling step-size sufficiently smaller than            to ensure a sufficient number
                                                                                                           𝐾 −1
of training data points.

                                                                             9
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                    Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


5. Applications and performance assessments

   Here, the proposed mechanics-informed deep learning framework for data-driven nonlinear viscoelasticity is illustrated using
four different applications for which its performance is also assessed:

    • First, an academic problem, where the framework is applied to train an ANN-based viscoelastic model on synthetic data
      generated by a nonlinear convolution integral whose integrand includes a nonlinear functional form associated with a
      viscoelastic material. The purpose of this problem is to demonstrate the ability of the mechanics-informed three potential
      framework summarized in Section 3.3 to capture nonlinear kernel convolutions that lack a trivial internal variable dual
      formulation.
    • Next, a coupon problem, where the framework is applied to construct an ANN for representing a viscoelastic material law
      generated by a FE-based multi-scale homogenization of a woven fabric. The purpose here is to demonstrate the framework’s
      ability to teach an ANN a material law generated by the homogenization of a nonlinear viscoelastic material for the purpose
      of accelerating multi-scale computations.
    • Then, a FE analysis of a membrane characterized by the material law generated in the previous application and uni-axial
      loading and unloading at different strain rates. The purpose of this application is to demonstrate that the ANN-based model
      constructed using the proposed framework exhibits hysteresis only at intermediate strain rates and otherwise reproduces an
      elastic behavior, thanks to its mechanics-based hard constraints.
    • And finally, FE simulations of the bouncing of a rigid ball on a viscoelastic membrane associated with different material
      models for the membrane, including that generated in the previous application. The purpose of these simulations is two-fold:
      to demonstrate the impact on the numerical stability of a FE analysis of constitutive laws generated by different data-driven
      approaches; and to highlight the ability of the proposed framework for data-driven constitutive modeling to generate a
      viscoelastic material law that not only promotes the numerical stability of a FE analysis, but also enables it to reproduce
      expected dynamic behaviors.

    In all cases:

    • The following settings are adopted: 𝑡0 = 0, 𝜶 0 = 𝟎, and 𝑬 0 = 𝟎.
                                                    (                         )
    • Attention is restricted to plane-stress states 𝑺 𝑍 = [𝑆33 𝑆23 𝑆13 ]𝑇 = 𝟎 , where the constitutive law is a mapping between the
      time-history of the in-plane strains 𝑬 = [𝐸11 𝐸22 2𝐸12 ] and the in-plane stresses 𝑺 𝑀 = [𝑆11 𝑆22 𝑆12 ]𝑇 . Thus, attention is
                                              𝑀                  𝑇

      focused on the cases corresponding to 𝑑 = 2 and 𝑑 ′ = 3. For this reason, it is noted that all arguments and methods presented
      in Section 4 remain valid when all occurrences of 𝑬  ̂ and 𝑺̂ in that section are replaced by 𝑬 𝑀 and 𝑺 𝑀 , respectively.
    • The ANN-based material models are constructed and trained using the machine learning framework PyTorch; and the
      FE analyses are performed using the nonlinear FE structural analyzer AERO-S [36,37] equipped with the multi-scale
      homogenization method described in [16].


5.1. Learning synthetic data generated by a nonlinear convolution

    Given a strain path, synthetic viscoelastic stress data is generated here using the nonlinear convolution integral
                               𝑡          (               )
                                                      𝑀
       𝑺 𝑀 (𝑡) = 𝑨𝑬 𝑀 (𝑡) +      𝑲(𝑡 − 𝜏)𝒇 𝑬 𝑀 (𝜏), 𝑬̇ (𝜏) d𝜏                                                                              (36)
                            ∫0
where
            𝑲(𝑡 − 𝜏) = 𝑒−𝜴(𝑡−𝜏)
         (           )
                   𝑀          𝑀( 𝑀     )
        𝒇 𝑬 𝑀 , 𝑬̇     = 𝑫 𝑬̇   𝑬 ⋅ 𝑬𝑀

𝑨, 𝜴, and 𝑫 ∈ Sym23 (R) ⪰ 0 are constant, and the elastic component of the viscoelastic material represented by (36) is therefore
linear. To this end, it is recalled that the mechanics-informed, data-driven framework for learning nonlinear elasticity developed
in [22] and summarized in Section 2, which is incorporated by design in the counterpart framework proposed in this paper for
nonlinear viscoelasticity, was already shown in [22] to capture well nonlinear elasticity. Thus the focus is placed here on the ability
of the new framework to represent nonlinear viscoelasticity.
    To this end, three strain paths are generated as described in Section 4.3: two to train the ANN-based model; and one to test its
predictive capability. Fig. 1 shows how well the trained ANN-based model fits to the training data, despite the highly oscillatory
nature of the strain path. Fig. 2 highlights the predictive capability of the constructed ANN-based material model – that is, its
performance for an ‘‘unseen’’ strain path – which is impressive, considering that training is performed in this case on only two strain
paths. Collectively, the results reported in Figs. 1 and 2 demonstrate the ability of the ANN-based model to learn the structure of the
constitutive law underlying the training data, rather than just memorizing it. Without the mechanics-informed constraints developed
in this paper, this task would require a significantly larger amount of data and many more training strain paths. Furthermore, the
aforementioned results suggest a potential equivalence between the nonlinear internal variable approach adopted in the proposed
framework and nonlinear kernel convolutions.

                                                                    10
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463




Fig. 1. Fits of the ANN-based viscoelastic model to the stress time-history (top) and stress–strain data (bottom) generated by the nonlinear convolution integral
along a training strain path (stress is in MPa).




Fig. 2. Fits of the ANN-based viscoelastic model to the stress time-history (top) and stress–strain data (bottom) generated by the nonlinear convolution integral
along the unseen strain path (stress is in MPa).




5.2. Learning a homogenized viscoelastic material law at the coupon level to accelerate multi-scale computations

    Multi-scale homogenization, which is critical for the design and development of fibrous materials with enhanced performance
and tailorable properties, is typically computationally intractable — for example, when performed using the concept of a locally
attached micro-structure [38–41] or more specifically, the ‘‘FE squared’’ (FE2 ) method [40,42]. The recent development of a variety
of surrogate modeling techniques — including nonlinear, projection-based model order reduction [43–45], kriging [46], and ANN

                                                                               11
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                               Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463




Fig. 3. Numerical coupon test problem: boundary conditions; and FE discretization at the macro-scale level using a single membrane element with a single
Gauss quadrature point.




Fig. 4. Geometry and behavior of a RVE for a woven fabric material in the presence of contact between the yarns: bi-axial compression (left); and bi-axial
tension (right).




representations [13,47,48] — to accelerate the solution of one or more scale problems has led however to a coherent methodology
by which a computationally tractable multi-scale approximation can be attained. Here, the context is set to that of the computational
homogenization framework developed in [16] for the nonlinear, dynamic, two-scale (macro–micro) modeling of woven fabrics [16].
This framework generalizes the FE2 method to settings where, at the macro-scale level, the problem is discretized by solid elements;
and at the micro-scale level, it is discretized by membrane, plate, or shell elements.
    Specifically, a triangular coupon with a unit base, a unit height, one corner pinned, and prescribed displacement degrees of
freedom (dofs) at the two other corners (see Fig. 3) is considered.
    The following two-scale numerical coupon problem is formulated for developing an ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic
material law suitable for accelerating the solution of two-scale problems associated with a woven fabric made of Nylon or a similar
material:

    • At the macro-scale level, the coupon is discretized by a single geometrically nonlinear membrane element with a single Gauss
      quadrature point. Thus, the coupon calls for a constitutive law for plane-stress problems.
    • At the micro-scale level, the geometry of the representative volume element (RVE) is designed at the level of yarns and shown
      in Fig. 4. The corresponding FE model is geometrically nonlinear: it is built using 1024 brick elements; 1836 nodes; 5508 dofs;
      4 pairs of contact surfaces where the yarns can interact with each other and contact is enforced using the penalty method;
      and periodic boundary conditions. At this level, each solid element is attributed a neo-Hookean material law parameterized by
      Young’s modulus 𝐸 and Poisson’s ratio 𝜈; and is equipped with a three-term Prony series parameterized by 𝑔𝑗 and 𝜏𝑗 , 𝑗 = 1, 2, 3.
      To simulate manufacturing imperfections or ambiguity in the nature of the micro-structure, the material parameters of each
      element are drawn from uniform distributions  centered around their mean values — that is:

          – 𝐸 𝑖 ∼  [0.8 × 109 , 1.2 × 109 ] Pa and 𝜈 𝑖 ∼  [0.35, 0.45], where 𝑖 designates the 𝑖th solid element of the mesh constructed at
            the micro-scale level;
          – and 𝑔𝑗𝑖 ∼  [0.1, 0.2] and 𝜏𝑗𝑖 ∼  [0.5, 1.5] s, 𝑗 = 1, 2, 3.

    Synthetic stress data is generated by performing virtual dynamic tests on the numerical coupon as follows. Five training strain
paths and one testing strain path are generated as described in Section 4.3 for the in-plane strains 𝑬 𝑀 = [𝐸11 𝐸22 2𝐸12 ]𝑇 . Then,
each time-dependent discrete strain vector 𝑬 𝑀 (𝑡) computed along a strain path is transformed into three discrete time-histories
for the displacement dofs 𝑢1 , 𝑢2 , and 𝑢3 shown in Fig. 3, using the FE approximation underlying the single membrane element

                                                                           12
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                               Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463




Fig. 5. Fits of the MI-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic model to the stress time-history (top) and stress–strain data (bottom) generated by the two-scale
numerical coupon along a training strain path (stress is in MPa).




discretizing the coupon at the macro-scale level. Next, each set of discrete time-histories (𝑢1 (𝑡), 𝑢2 (𝑡), 𝑢3 (𝑡)) computed along a strain
path is prescribed as boundary conditions for the FE model constructed at the macro-scale level; and the resulting two-scale problem
is solved using the computational homogenization framework described in [16] to produce a corresponding time-history of in-plane
stresses 𝑬 𝑀 (𝑡) = [𝐸11 (𝑡) 𝐸22 (𝑡) 2𝐸12 (𝑡)]𝑇 . Finally, 5% Gaussian noise is added to all data points generated in the training paths to
mimic the measurement errors that typically occur in physical coupon tests.
    The data collected from the numerical coupon tests outlined above is used to train two candidate ANN sets for learning the
corresponding homogenized viscoelastic material law: a set of unconstrained ‘‘vanilla’’ ANNs (V-ANN) defined here as a set of ANNs
constructed to learn directly the functions in Eqs. (2) to (4) — that is, without even attempting to enforce any constraint; and a
counterpart set of mechanics-informed ANNs (MI-ANN) that follows the principles developed in this paper.
    Figs. 5 and 6 report on the numerical predictions obtained using the MI-ANN along one of the training strain paths and along
the testing (or unseen) strain path, respectively. Figs. 7 and 8 report on the counterpart predictions obtained using the V-ANN-
based model. In these figures, the reader can observe that despite the high nonlinearity of the material’s response induced by the
weakness of the RVE in compression and shear, which is typical of woven fabric materials, and despite the hysteresis caused by
the randomized spectrum of relaxation times introduced at the micro-scale level (see above), the predictions performed by both
ANN-based models fit well to the training data. However, the same cannot be said for the unseen test data. Indeed, Figs. 7 and 8
show that the V-ANN-based model predicts poorly the homogenized viscoelastic material law along the unseen strain path at later
times — possibly due to the unrestricted growth of the internal variable due to the absence of stability constraints. On the other
hand, despite the limited amount of training data, the MI-ANN-based model is found to perform well even along the unseen strain
path. The only noticeable discrepancies are in the prediction of the shear stress, which is orders of magnitude smaller than the axial
stresses and therefore difficult to resolve.


5.3. FE analysis of a viscoelastic membrane under uni-axial loading and unloading at different strain rates


    Here, a 1 m × 0.5 m rectangular membrane made of a fictitious woven fabric material whose behavior is well-captured by the MI-
ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic model developed in Section 5.2 is considered. The membrane is solicited by uni-axial loading
and unloading at various strain rates chosen such that hysteresis can be expected only at the intermediate strain rates — and thus
no loading-unloading dissipation should be exhibited in the lower and upper limits of the chose strain rate interval. The membrane
is pinned at its left side along the short direction and discretized by 20 geometrically nonlinear membrane elements. The resulting
dofs are constrained as needed to prevent motion in the transverse direction. On the right side of the membrane along the short

                                                                            13
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                               Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463




Fig. 6. Fits of the MI-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic model to the stress time-history (top) and stress–strain data (bottom) generated by the two-scale
numerical coupon along an unseen strain path (stress is in MPa).




Fig. 7. Fits of the V-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic model to the stress time-history (top) and stress–strain data (bottom) generated by the two-scale
numerical coupon along a training strain path (stress is in MPa).




                                                                            14
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                               Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463




Fig. 8. Fits of the V-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic model to the stress time-history (top) and stress–strain data (bottom) generated by the two-scale
numerical coupon along a training strain path (stress is in MPa).




direction, the following time-dependent displacement field is prescribed along the long direction of the resulting FE model
                       (                   )      (     )
                ⎧               1                     1
                ⎪𝐴𝑒 exp −                2
                                            , 𝑡 ∈ 0,
       𝑢1 (𝑡) = ⎨         1 − (2𝑓 𝑡 − 1)             𝑓
                ⎪0,                            otherwise
                ⎩
where 𝐴 controls the maximum displacement amplitude and is set to 𝐴 = 0.25 m; 𝑒 is Euler’s number; and four different values of
the rate 𝑓 are considered in the range [10−4 , 102 ] s−1 .
    The resulting FE discrete system is time-integrated using the second-order implicit midpoint rule.
    Fig. 9 displays the stress–strain curves obtained using the same MI-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic model and vanilla
counterpart (the V-ANN-based material model) developed in Section 5.2; and the different aforementioned loading and unloading
rates. In this figure, the reader can observe that at the upper and lower limits of the considered range of rates, the loading and
unloading curves predicted using the MI-ANN-based material model collapse in each case on each other, indicating that this model
respects the rule associated with lower and higher strain rates. At the intermediate values of 𝑓 however, the loading and unloading
curves exhibit a hysteresis loop, as expected. On the other hand, the V-ANN model appears to behave like a hyperelastic material
model in the high strain rate limit, but exhibits a nonphysical behavior at low strain rates; thus, it cannot recover the behavior
expected during a quasistatic loading. The main reason is as follows. In the V-ANN model, the ODE governing the evolution of the
internal variable is not constrained to be stable; thus, the ANN 𝛤 may exhibit online an oscillatory growth in the values it predicts
                                   𝜕𝐺(𝛤 )
and thus may lead to predictions          of the dissipation potential gradient that have the incorrect sign. Then, the online equivalent
                                    𝜕 𝛽̂
                                                                  𝑝
of the time-integration (30) may produce spurious values of 𝛼̂ (𝜙𝛾)    that, when inputted to the ANN 𝛷 , lead to spurious values of
the prediction 𝑉(𝛷) of the viscoelastic component of the strain energy density function and thus corrupt the prediction 𝑺      ̂ (𝛩,𝛷,𝛤 ) of
                                                                                            𝑝
the stress field. For example, for the problem considered herein, the range of values of 𝛼̂ (𝜙𝛾) spanned during training of the V-ANN
model is roughly [−0.3, 0.3], but its counterpart reached during its online execution is [0, 1030 ].

5.4. FE simulation of the bouncing of a ball on a viscoelastic membrane

    Finally, this section considers the FE simulation of the bouncing of a rigid spherical ball on a circular membrane made of a
viscoelastic material. The spherical ball has a radius of 0.125 m; the circular membrane has a of radius 1 m; and the ball is dropped
on the membrane from a height of 1 m (see Fig. 10-(a)).
    The flexible circular membrane is discretized by 11,909 geometrically nonlinear triangular membrane elements and is pinned
at its circumference. The rigid sphere is discretized by 3491 rigid tetrahedral elements, where the rigidity constraints are enforced

                                                                           15
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463




Fig. 9. Stress–strain curves computed for a viscoelastic fibrous membrane subjected to uni-axial loading and unloading at different strain rates, using: (a) an
MI-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic material model; and (b) a V-ANN-based counterpart model (stress is in MPa).




Fig. 10. FE simulation of the bouncing of a rigid spherical ball on a circular fibrous membrane: (a) initial conditions; and (b) solution snapshot corresponding
to a position of contact between the ball and the membrane.




using a penalty method. Under the effect of gravity, the ball and the membrane interact through contact, which is detected and
enforced using the library ACME [49].
   For this application, the resulting FE discrete system is time-integrated using the second-order explicit central difference method.

    Specifically, three different FE simulations are performed, each associated with a different material for the membrane:

    • The same fictitious woven fabric material considered in Section 5.3 — whose behavior is assumed here again to be
      well-captured by the MI-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic model developed in Section 5.2.
    • The same fictitious woven fabric material considered in Section 5.3, but represented by the V-ANN-based homogenized
      viscoelastic model developed in Section 5.2.
    • A fictitious woven fabric model whose behavior is assumed to be well-captured by a plane-stress neo-Hookean constitutive
      law equipped with a three-term Prony series (NH-Prony). The main purpose of the FE simulation configured with this material
      law is to serve as a reference for assessing the qualitative behavior of the two previous counterpart simulations.

   Fig. 11 displays the time-histories of the height of the ball (above or below the undeformed surface of the membrane) computed
using all three FE simulations outlined above. It reveals that:

                                                                              16
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                 Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463




           Fig. 11. Time-histories of the ball’s height predicted by FE simulations configured with different constitutive models for the membrane.




    • The FE simulation configured with the V-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic material model quickly becomes numerically
      unstable. Most likely, this is because this model is not mechanics-informed and thus does not enforce any of the stability
      constraints discussed in this paper.
    • On the other hand, the counterpart simulation configured with the MI-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic material model
      remains numerically stable at all times. Furthermore, the time-history it computes for the height of the ball exhibits
      a fundamentally viscoelastic behavior. Indeed, the energy dissipation exhibited by this time-history is clearly positive.
      Furthermore, this time-history predicts that after a certain time, all energies are dissipated and the ball reaches a steady-state.
    • The time-history of the height of the ball predicted using the FE simulation configured with the NH-Prony constitutive law
      for the circular membrane confirms qualitatively the correct behavior of the results of the counterpart simulation performed
      using the MI-ANN-based homogenized viscoelastic material model.



6. Summary and conclusions


    ANNs are prime candidates for data-driven constitutive modeling due to their excellent form-agnostic function fitting capabilities,
rapid online execution time, and automated differentiability. Nonetheless, when trained using a realistic amount of data and adopted
as black-box regressors, ANNs may violate the laws of mechanics. Thus, they may lead to the prediction of spurious phenomena. As
shown in this paper however, these deficiencies can be eliminated by teaching ANNs fundamental laws of mechanics. Specifically,
this paper proposes a mechanics-informed, data-driven framework for learning a nonlinear viscoelastic material model from stress–
strain data using ANNs that is grounded in an additive decomposition of the strain energy density and an internal variable approach
to viscoelasticity. The framework is characterized by three potentials whose ANN representations are taught objectivity, the second
law of thermodynamics, dynamic stability, material stability, internal variable stability, the preservation of rigid body modes,
and the recovery of elastic limits. Through several applications, it is shown that the proposed framework generates ANN-based
viscoelastic material models that preserve the numerical stability of FE simulations; perform well in predicting stress time-histories
and stress–strain relationships along unseen strain paths; and impede the prediction of nonphysical phenomena.


Declaration of competing interest


    The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing
interests: Faisal Asád reports financial support was provided by Stanford University.


Data availability


    No data was used for the research described in the article.

                                                                             17
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                   Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


Acknowledgments

    The authors acknowledge partial support by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, United States under Grant FA9550-20-
1-0358 and Grant FA9550-21-1-0015; and partial support by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) under
Early Stage Innovations (ESI) Grant 80NSSC21K0228. The first author also acknowledges partial support by the Stanford Graduate
Fellowship (SGF).

Appendix. Choosing the penalty hyperparameters of the training loss function

    In (32), choosing appropriate values for the hyperparameters 𝜆𝑘 , 𝑘 = 1, … 𝑑 ′ , is critical for the convergence of the loss function
minimizer to a good local minimum. If the 𝜆𝑘 are too small, the ODE governing the internal variable is insufficiently enforced, which
may lead to a poor training of the ANN and its poor online performance. If the 𝜆𝑘 are too large, the three potentials governing the
stress predictions may not be sufficiently learned, which may also lead to a poor online performance of the resulting ANN.
    To justify the heuristic described below for setting the hyperparameters 𝜆𝑘 to appropriate values, consider the following two
limiting cases for training data:

    • When the data corresponds to the elastic regime – that is, it does not exhibit hysteresis or strain-rate dependence – the influence
      of the internal variable on the constitutive law vanishes and therefore its evolution is irrelevant. In this case, the settings 𝜆𝑘 = 0
      for all 𝑘 are desirable.
    • When the data corresponds to the purely viscous regime — that is, 𝑊 (𝑬) ≡ 0 in (26) — each of the internal variable and
      viscous potential makes a significant contribution to the material response predicted by the ANN-based constitutive model. In
      this case, a poor prediction of the internal variable leads to a poor prediction of the viscous potential and vice versa. Therefore,
      in this case, the settings 𝜆𝑘 ≈ 1 for all 𝑘 are desirable.

    Consequently, the following heuristic is proposed for determining appropriate settings for all 𝜆𝑘 :

    • (a) Train the ANN representation 𝑊(𝛩) of the elastic component 𝑊 of the strain energy density function 𝑈 (see (23)) to fit as
      best as possible to the stress–strain data, as described in Section 2.
    • (b) Compute the residual stress along each 𝑝th strain path and interpret it as the viscous component of the total stress along
      this path
                                         𝜕𝑊(𝛩) ( 𝑝     )
               ̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 ) = 𝑺
               𝑺           ̂ 𝑝 (𝑡𝑚 ) −          𝑬 (𝑡𝑚 ) ,   𝑚 = 1, … , 𝑁𝑚 ,      𝑝 = 1, … , 𝑁𝑝
                 𝑣
                                           ̂
                                          𝜕𝑬
    • (c) Compute each hyperparameter 𝜆𝑘 as the ratio between the corresponding viscous stress and the total stress — that is,
                 ∑𝑁𝑝 ∑𝑁𝑚 ̂
                   𝑝=1
                           𝑆 (𝑡 )2
                        𝑚=1 𝑣𝑘 𝑚
            𝜆𝑘 = ∑ 𝑁 ∑              , 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝑑 ′
                      𝑝 𝑁𝑚 ̂      2
                    𝑝=1
                           𝑆  (𝑡
                        𝑚=1 𝑘 𝑚
                                 )

   Specifically, the parameters 𝛩 obtained at the end of Step (a) are used to initialize the parameters 𝜃 in Eq. (32) — because they
can be expected to correspond to a good initial approximation.

References

 [1] Niels Saabye Ottosen, Matti Ristinmaa, The Mechanics of Constitutive Modeling, Elsevier, 2005.
 [2] Dieter Besdo, Jörn Ihlemann, A phenomenological constitutive model for rubberlike materials and its numerical applications, Int. J. Plast. 19 (7) (2003)
     1019–1036.
 [3] Hang Lin, Shijie Xie, Rui Yong, Yifan Chen, Shigui Du, An empirical statistical constitutive relationship for rock joint shearing considering scale effect, C.
     R. Mec. 347 (8) (2019) 561–575.
 [4] Deepak Kumar, Md Moonim Lateefi, Somnath Sarangi, A phenomenological model for the viscoelastic behaviour of natural rubber, in: IOP Conference
     Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 577, IOP Publishing, 2019, 012020.
 [5] Christian Linder, Mykola Tkachuk, Christian Miehe, A micromechanically motivated diffusion-based transient network model and its incorporation into
     finite rubber viscoelasticity, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 59 (10) (2011) 2134–2156.
 [6] D. Pond, A.T. McBride, L.M. Davids, B.D. Reddy, G. Limbert, Microstructurally-based constitutive modelling of the skin–linking intrinsic ageing to
     microstructural parameters, J. Theoret. Biol. 444 (2018) 108–123.
 [7] George Cybenko, Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function, Math. Control Signals Syst. 2 (4) (1989) 303–314.
 [8] J. Ghaboussi, J.H. Garrett Jr., Xiping Wu, Knowledge-based modeling of material behavior with neural networks, J. Eng. Mech. 117 (1) (1991) 132–153.
 [9] Jamshid Ghaboussi, David A Pecknold, Mingfu Zhang, Rami M Haj-Ali, Autoprogressive training of neural network constitutive models, Internat. J. Numer.
     Methods Engrg. 42 (1) (1998) 105–126.
[10] P.S. Theocaris, P.D. Panagiotopoulos, Plasticity including the Bauschinger effect, studied by a neural network approach, Acta Mech. 113 (1) (1995) 63–75.
[11] Tomonari Furukawa, Genki Yagawa, Implicit constitutive modelling for viscoplasticity using neural networks, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 43 (2)
     (1998) 195–219.
[12] Daniel Z. Huang, Kailai Xu, Charbel Farhat, Eric Darve, Learning constitutive relations from indirect observations using deep neural networks, J. Comput.
     Phys. 416 (2020) 109491.
[13] B.A. Le, Julien Yvonnet, Q.-C. He, Computational homogenization of nonlinear elastic materials using neural networks, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg.
     104 (12) (2015) 1061–1084.


                                                                               18
F. As’ad and C. Farhat                                                                  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 417 (2023) 116463


[14] Steven M Arnold, Matthew Piekenbrock, Trenton M Ricks, Joshua Stuckner, Multiscale analysis of composites using surrogate modeling and information
     optimal designs, in: AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum, AIAA, 2020, p. 1863.
[15] Joshua Stuckner, Sawyer Graeber, Brooke Weborg, Trenton M Ricks, Steven M Arnold, Tractable multiscale modeling with an embedded microscale
     surrogate, in: AIAA Scitech 2021 Forum, AIAA, 2021, p. 1963.
[16] Philip Avery, Daniel Z Huang, Wanli He, Johanna Ehlers, Armen Derkevorkian, Charbel Farhat, A computationally tractable framework for nonlinear
     dynamic multiscale modeling of membrane woven fabrics, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 122 (10) (2021) 2598–2625.
[17] T. Borrvall, C. Ehle, T. Stratton, A fabric material model with stress map functionality in LS-DYNA, in: 10th European LS-DYNA Conference, LS-DYNA,
     2015.
[18] Kailai Xu, Alexandre M Tartakovsky, Jeff Burghardt, Eric Darve, Inverse modeling of viscoelasticity materials using physics constrained learning, 2020,
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04384.
[19] Maysam B Gorji, Mojtaba Mozaffar, Julian N Heidenreich, Jian Cao, Dirk Mohr, On the potential of recurrent neural networks for modeling path dependent
     plasticity, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 143 (2020) 103972.
[20] Moritz Flaschel, Siddhant Kumar, Laura De Lorenzis, Unsupervised discovery of interpretable hyperelastic constitutive laws, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech.
     Engrg. 381 (2021) 113852.
[21] Kailai Xu, Daniel Z. Huang, Eric Darve, Learning constitutive relations using symmetric positive definite neural networks, J. Comput. Phys. 428 (2021)
     110072.
[22] Faisal As’ad, Philip Avery, Charbel Farhat, A mechanics-informed artificial neural network approach in data-driven constitutive modeling, Internat. J.
     Numer. Methods Engrg. 123 (12) (2022) 2738–2759.
[23] Dominik K Klein, Mauricio Fernández, Robert J Martin, Patrizio Neff, Oliver Weeger, Polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity with neural networks, J. Mech.
     Phys. Solids 159 (2022) 104703.
[24] Prakash Thakolkaran, Akshay Joshi, Yiwen Zheng, Moritz Flaschel, Laura De Lorenzis, Siddhant Kumar, NN-EUCLID: Deep-learning hyperelasticity without
     stress data, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06664.
[25] Jan N. Fuhg, Nikolaos Bouklas, On physics-informed data-driven isotropic and anisotropic constitutive models through probabilistic machine learning and
     space-filling sampling, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 394 (2022) 114915.
[26] Quercus Hernandez, Alberto Badias, Francisco Chinesta, Elias Cueto, Thermodynamics-informed graph neural networks, IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell. 1 (01)
     (2022) 1.
[27] Shenglin Huang, Zequn He, Celia Reina, Variational Onsager neural networks (VONNs): A thermodynamics-based variational learning strategy for
     non-equilibrium PDEs, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 163 (2022) 104856.
[28] Faisal As’ad, Charbel Farhat, A mechanics-informed neural network framework for data-driven nonlinear viscoelasticity, in: AIAA SCITECH 2023 Forum,
     2023, p. 0949.
[29] Brandon Amos, Lei Xu, J. Zico Kolter, Input convex neural networks, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2017, pp. 146–155.
[30] Richard Christensen, Theory of Viscoelasticity: An Introduction, Elsevier, 2012.
[31] Bernard D. Coleman, Morton E. Gurtin, Thermodynamics with internal state variables, J. Chem. Phys. 47 (2) (1967) 597–613.
[32] J-C Petiteau, Erwan Verron, Ramzi Othman, Herve Le Sourne, J-F Sigrist, Guillaume Barras, Large strain rate-dependent response of elastomers at different
     strain rates: Convolution integral vs. internal variable formulations, Mech. Time-Depend. Mater. 17 (3) (2013) 349–367.
[33] M Hosseini-Farid, A Rezaei, A Eslaminejad, M Ramzanpour, M Ziejewski, G Karami, Instantaneous and equilibrium responses of the brain tissue by stress
     relaxation and quasi-linear viscoelasticity theory, Sci. Iran. 26 (4: Special Issue Dedicated to Professor Abolhassan Vafai) (2019) 2047–2056.
[34] Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, Yoshua Bengio, On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks, in: International Conference on Machine Learning,
     PMLR, 2013, pp. 1310–1318.
[35] Burigede Liu, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anima Anandkumar, Andrew M Stuart, Kaushik Bhattacharya, A learning-based
     multiscale method and its application to inelastic impact problems, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 158 (2022) 104668.
[36] Philippe Geuzaine, Gregory Brown, Chuck Harris, Charbel Farhat, Aeroelastic dynamic analysis of a full F-16 configuration for various flight conditions,
     AIAA J. 41 (3) (2003) 363–371.
[37] Farhat Research Group, AERO-S, Bitbucket. Bitbucket repository. https://bitbucket.org/frg/aero-s.
[38] Robert J.M. Smit, W.A. Marcel Brekelmans, Han E.H. Meijer, Prediction of the mechanical behavior of nonlinear heterogeneous systems by multi-level
     finite element modeling, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 155 (1–2) (1998) 181–192.
[39] Christian Miehe, Jörg Schröder, Jan Schotte, Computational homogenization analysis in finite plasticity simulation of texture development in polycrystalline
     materials, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 171 (3–4) (1999) 387–418.
[40] Frédéric Feyel, Jean-Louis Chaboche, FE2 multiscale approach for modelling the elastoviscoplastic behaviour of long fibre SiC/Ti composite materials,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 183 (3–4) (2000) 309–330.
[41] Varvara Kouznetsova, W.A.M. Brekelmans, FPT1005 Baaijens, An approach to micro-macro modeling of heterogeneous materials, Comput. Mech. 27 (1)
     (2001) 37–48.
[42] Felix Fritzen, Max Hodapp, The finite element square reduced (FE2R) method with GPU acceleration: Towards three-dimensional two-scale simulations,
     Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 107 (10) (2016) 853–881.
[43] Matthew J. Zahr, Philip Avery, Charbel Farhat, A multilevel projection-based model order reduction framework for nonlinear dynamic multiscale problems
     in structural and solid mechanics, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 112 (8) (2017) 855–881.
[44] Julien Yvonnet, Q.-C. He, The reduced model multiscale method (R3M) for the non-linear homogenization of hyperelastic media at finite strains, J. Comput.
     Phys. 223 (1) (2007) 341–368.
[45] Wanli He, Philip Avery, Charbel Farhat, In-situ adaptive reduction of nonlinear multiscale structural dynamics models, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg.
     121 (22) (2020) 4971–4988.
[46] J Knap, NR Barton, RD Hornung, A Arsenlis, R Becker, DR Jefferson, Adaptive sampling in hierarchical simulation, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg.
     76 (4) (2008) 572–600.
[47] Xiaoxin Lu, Dimitris G Giovanis, Julien Yvonnet, Vissarion Papadopoulos, Fabrice Detrez, Jinbo Bai, A data-driven computational homogenization method
     based on neural networks for the nonlinear anisotropic electrical response of graphene/polymer nanocomposites, Comput. Mech. 64 (2) (2019) 307–321.
[48] Fadi Aldakheel, Elsayed S Elsayed, Tarek I Zohdi, Peter Wriggers, Efficient multiscale modeling of heterogeneous materials using deep neural networks,
     Comput. Mech. (2023) 1–17.
[49] Kevin H Brown, Randall M Summers, Micheal W Glass, Arne S Gullerud, Martin W Heinstein, Reese E Jones, ACME-Algorithms for Contact in a Multiphysics
     Environment API Version 1.0, Technical report, Sandia National Lab.(SNL-NM), Albuquerque, NM (United States), 2001.




                                                                              19
