                                                   Chapter 2




                     INTRODUCTION TO THEINVARIANT FORMULATION
                          OF ANISOTROPie CONSTITUTIVE EQUATIONS




                                               J.P. Boehler
                                      University of Grenoble, France




1. INTRODUCTION


        The aim of this Chapter is to present some elementary notion for
non-specialists in the invariant formulation of anisotropic constitutive
equations. Much of this Chapter is taken from [1].
        We consider the very simple case of a two-dimensional anisotropic
material of constitutive equation specifying a symmetric 2nd order tensor
T, which is a function of two symmetric second order tensors D and ~:


                                                   T      F(D,    0              ( 1)


In (1),     ~   is the structural tensor, taking into account the symmetries of
the material internal structure, D is the mechanical agency and T          the
mechanical response of the material. We use the absolute notation, not to
be related to coordinates at this point. For definiteness, T is the stress
tensor, D is the strain tensor in the case of elastic behavior or the



J. P. Boehler (ed.), Applications of Tensor Functions in Solid Mechanics
© Springer-Verlag Wien 1987
14                                                                             J.P. Boehler


rate of strain tensor in the case of plastic behavior. In genera1, the
principal directions (e ' e ) of the response T do               not coincide with the
                      - 1 - 2
principal directions (E ' E ) of the agency ~·
                             -1   - 2
        The constitutive equation       (1) is sketched in the Figure below,
where the material, in its initial configuration, is represented by a
circle and the attached orthonormal frame (v , v ); the tensorsTand D
                                                   -1     -2                    -
are represented by their associated ellipses. Similar sketches will be
used throughout this Chapter.




     Initial configuration
                                                      F
                                                          ...
       of the material
                                         Agency   D             Response   T
                                                                  the material
                                              F depends on ~
                                                                 the behavior




                                    Constitutive relation


2. PRINCIPLE OF ISOTROPY OF SPACE


2.1 Physical concept

        Constitutive equations are subjected to the invariance requirements
of the Principle of Isotropy of Space          (or Principle of Material Indif-
ference [2]). We shall apply it here to the simple situation involved in
the equation (1).
