INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL FOR NUMERICAL METHODS IN ENGINEERING
Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
Published online 7 April 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/nme.4668




Dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models
   with finite rotations and energy-based mesh sampling and
             weighting for computational efficiency

         Charbel Farhat1,2,3,*,† , Philip Avery1 , Todd Chapman1 and Julien Cortial3
            1 Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
               2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
     3 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA




                                                  SUMMARY
A rigorous computational framework for the dimensional reduction of discrete, high-fidelity, nonlinear,
finite element structural dynamics models is presented. It is based on the pre-computation of solution
snapshots, their compression into a reduced-order basis, and the Galerkin projection of the given discrete
high-dimensional model onto this basis. To this effect, this framework distinguishes between vector-valued
displacements and manifold-valued finite rotations. To minimize computational complexity, it also differen-
tiates between the cases of constant and configuration-dependent mass matrices. Like most projection-based
nonlinear model reduction methods, however, its computational efficiency hinges not only on the ability of
the constructed reduced-order basis to capture the dominant features of the solution of interest but also on
the ability of this framework to compute fast and accurate approximations of the projection onto a subspace
of tangent matrices and/or force vectors. The computation of the latter approximations is often referred to
in the literature as hyper reduction. Hence, this paper also presents the energy-conserving sampling and
weighting (ECSW) hyper reduction method for discrete (or semi-discrete), nonlinear, finite element struc-
tural dynamics models. Based on mesh sampling and the principle of virtual work, ECSW is natural for finite
element computations and preserves an important energetic aspect of the high-dimensional finite element
model to be reduced. Equipped with this hyper reduction procedure, the aforementioned Galerkin projection
framework is first demonstrated for several academic but challenging problems. Then, its potential for the
effective solution of real problems is highlighted with the realistic simulation of the transient response of a
vehicle to an underbody blast event. For this problem, the proposed nonlinear model reduction framework
reduces the CPU time required by a typical high-dimensional model by up to four orders of magnitude while
maintaining a good level of accuracy. Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received 21 December 2013; Revised 6 March 2014; Accepted 9 March 2014

KEY WORDS:       ECSW; finite rotations; Galerkin projection; hyper reduction; mesh sampling; model
                 reduction; nonlinear dynamics; proper orthogonal decomposition


                                            1. INTRODUCTION

The application of the finite element (FE) method to the simulation of large structural dynamics
problems has become ubiquitous in both the research and industrial worlds. It has provided a sys-
tematic framework for analyzing and developing complex engineering systems. As this complexity
is increased and the accuracy requirement of a FE analysis is tightened, the dimension of the high-
fidelity FE model of interest is increased, the total CPU time required for performing parametric
simulations using this computational model becomes cost prohibitive, and the computational design
approach becomes impractical.


*Correspondence to: Charbel Farhat, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
  94305-4035, USA.
† E-mail: cfarhat@stanford.edu



Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
                                                                                                              10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
626                                          C. FARHAT ET AL.


   Reduced-order models (ROMs) based on projection methods offer a reprieve from the curse
of dimensionality, choosing to search for online solutions in a smaller dimensional subspace that
has been pre-computed offline using the high-dimensional FE model (HDM) of interest. However,
because the construction cost of the projected equations of equilibrium scales with the size of the
HDM, projection-based ROMs are effective only for problems where the reduced operators need to
be constructed only once, or are computed a priori. Examples include the frequency-domain analy-
sis of linear, time-invariant dynamical systems [1], the linear static analysis of problems where the
underlying mathematical operators are affine in their parameter space [2], and problems with at most
quadratic nonlinearities [3, 4]. Within this context, projection-based model reduction has been suc-
cessfully demonstrated in many areas of computational engineering including frequency response
analysis [5–7], aeroelastic predictions [8–15], and structural vibrations [16, 17].
   Nonlinear dynamical systems offer a new set of challenges for projection-based reduction
methods. To begin, vector-valued functions must be differentiated from manifold-valued ones. For
example, in nonlinear FE structural dynamics models, the displacement DOFs at a node are vector
valued, but the rotational DOFs at the same node are typically manifold valued. Furthermore, the
projected equations, or the ROM they define, are no longer computationally efficient to process. The
obstruction arises in the evaluation of the nonlinear terms, which must be computed and then pro-
jected on the reduced subspace at each time-step. The cost of this step, unfortunately, scales with the
size of the HDM. Several approaches attempting to circumvent this problem have been developed.
They are outlined later and referred to in this paper as hyper reduction [18] methods.
   The ‘empirical interpolation method’ (EIM) reduces the computational cost associated with
computing the nonlinear terms of interest by interpolating their values at a few spatial locations using
an empirically derived reduced-order basis (ROB) (for example, see [19] and the references cited
therein). A variant of this method [20] uses ‘best [interpolation] points’ and a proper orthogonal
decomposition (POD) basis. Both of these hyper reduction methods operate at the continuous level.
Other hyper reduction approaches have been developed at the semi-discrete level – that is, at the level
of the ordinary differential equation obtained after discretizing the governing partial differential
equation in space. Among these, the ‘function sampling’ class of cost-reduction methods addresses
the aforementioned computational bottleneck by computing only a few entries of the nonlinear func-
tion of interest. Within this class of methods, collocation approaches were investigated first [21].
In contrast to these methods, function reconstruction approaches use the sampled entries of the
nonlinear function of interest to approximate it via interpolation or least-squares regression. One
such approach performs the reconstruction in the least-squares sense using the same ROB used to
represent the state vector [22]. Other related approaches include discrete analogs to the empirical
and best points interpolation methods [23, 24] and the Gauss–Newton with approximated tensors
method [25], which was shown in [26] to speed up HDM simulations of turbulent flows by orders
of magnitude while delivering ROM solutions that maintain 95% of the accuracy of their HDM
counterparts.
   Unfortunately, the various methods outlined earlier focus primarily, if not exclusively, on the
accuracy of the approximated function while paying little if any attention to some important
properties of the resulting hyper reduced models such as preservation of symmetry (for the lin-
earized operators, when applicable) or numerical stability. Moreover, the implementation of many
of these methods is most natural for node-based spatial discretizations such as those arising from
the finite difference and finite volume methods. However, nonlinear structural dynamics models
typically originate from the FE method where the approximations are performed at the element
level, and symmetry (for the linearized operators) plays an important role. Furthermore, accuracy is
meaningful only when computability is ensured – that is, numerical stability is first achieved.
   For all these reasons, this work focuses on the numerically stable, cost-effective, projection-
based, dimensional reduction of high-fidelity, nonlinear, FE structural dynamics models with and
without rotational DOFs. It presents a computational framework for collecting solution snapshots –
that is, solutions of some parametric instances of the problem of interest based on the given HDM
– and compressing them into a ROB that distinguishes between vector-valued displacements and
manifold-valued finite rotations and treats them appropriately. This framework also differentiates
between the cases of constant and configuration-dependent mass matrices and performs in each

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                            10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                          627

case a different Galerkin projection in order to maximize computational efficiency. It also features
a hyper reduction technique that is natural for FE settings, preserves symmetry and stability, and
is equally effective for both explicit and implicit large-scale time-dependent computations. To this
effect, the remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
   Section 2 outlines the general semi-discrete FE equations governing nonlinear structural
dynamics problems. It emphasizes the difference between vector-valued displacement DOFs and
manifold-valued rotational DOFs. It also distinguishes between the case of a constant mass matrix,
which is typically encountered when the problem does not contain rotational DOFs, and that of a
configuration-dependent mass matrix, which is encountered otherwise. Section 3 presents a proper
treatment of vector-valued nodal displacements and manifold-valued nodal rotations that enables a
sensible collection of solution snapshots and their compression into an effective ROB. It also recalls
the notion of consistency of a ROM approximation introduced in [25]. Section 4 describes the
Galerkin projection component of the computational framework proposed in this paper for the non-
linear reduction of high-dimensional semi-discrete FE models. Because ultimately this framework
operates at the discrete level, both explicit and implicit approaches to time discretization are con-
sidered. The aforementioned distinction between the cases of constant and configuration-dependent
mass matrices is also exploited in this section to address an important computational complexity
issue. Section 5 completes the description of the proposed framework for nonlinear model reduc-
tion by presenting the energy-conserving sampling and weighting (ECSW) hyper reduction method
based on the concept of virtual work. It turns out that this independently developed method is related
to the quadrature rule developed in [27] for computer graphics applications. However, ECSW is
derived from a different perspective and relies on a different algorithm for computing the weighting
coefficients of the hyper reduction approximation. Section 6 illustrates the proposed computational
framework for nonlinear model reduction with the solution of a set of academic but nevertheless
challenging nonlinear structural dynamics problems. These have the merit of being easily repro-
ducible by the interested reader. Then, it highlights the potential of this proposed computational
technology for the effective solution of realistic, nonlinear, structural dynamics problems with two
implicit and explicit large-scale simulations of the response of a vehicle to an underbody blast
event. In both cases, the proposed nonlinear model reduction technology is found to reduce the CPU
time associated with the usage of the HDM by several orders of magnitude, while maintaining an
excellent level of accuracy. Finally, Section 7 concludes this paper.

 2. FORMULATION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF HIGH-DIMENSIONAL NONLINEAR
                     STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS MODELS

The HDMs considered in this paper may be characterized by various sources of nonlinearity,
including:
   Geometric nonlinearities due to the use of a strain–displacement relation that defines the strain
    measure as a nonlinear function of the unknown nodal rotation and/or displacement DOFs.
    Some common choices are the Green strain and the Hencky (or logarithmic) strain. The effects
    of these nonlinearities are non-negligible when the rotations are large.
   Material nonlinearities due to the use of a constitutive law that expresses the stress measure
    as a nonlinear function of the strain measure. Common examples are the nonlinear elastic neo-
    Hookean constitutive law and the nonlinear elasto-plastic J2 plasticity constitutive relation. The
    effects of these nonlinearities are non-negligible when the strains are large.
   Nonlinear inertial forces due to problem formulations in which the configuration space is a
    nonlinear manifold, which is a common approach for modeling beams, shells, and rigid bodies
    undergoing finite rotations. In this case, the dynamic equilibrium of forces and moments may
    include contributions of various so-called fictitious forces and moments. The particular form
    of such terms depends on the choice of frames of reference in which the forces and moments
    are expressed.
   Configuration-dependent external forces/moments such as surface pressure and follower nodal
    forces/moments.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                        DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
628                                          C. FARHAT ET AL.


   Nonlinear kinematic constraints. In many FE semi-discretizations, the nodal rotation and/or
    translation DOFs are not necessarily independent; they may be required to satisfy a set of kine-
    matic constraints, in which case the solution is restricted to a submanifold. Some examples
    of nonlinear kinematic constraints of this form are the rigid connections, joints, and con-
    tact inequalities that are typically used to define interactions between bodies in a multibody
    dynamics problem.
   As already stated in Section 1, the computational framework for nonlinear model reduction
proposed in this paper distinguishes between the cases of constant and configuration-dependent FE
mass matrices. For this reason, two nonlinear FE structural dynamics models are introduced in this
section. The first one, model P1, is characterized by a constant FE mass matrix and is representative
of those nonlinear structural dynamics models that contain only geometric and material nonlineari-
ties. The second model, referred to in the remainder of this paper as model P2, is characterized by
a configuration-dependent FE mass matrix. It is representative of a large class of nonlinear struc-
tural dynamics models where the sources of nonlinearities include nonlinear inertial forces and
configuration-dependent external forces, in addition to geometric and material nonlinearities. Note
that nonlinear constraints enforced approximately using the penalty method and a fixed penalty
parameter can be trivially incorporated in either of these two models by treating the constraint forces
as internal forces. Furthermore, the aforementioned computational framework for nonlinear model
reduction operates at the discrete level. Hence, after the two semi-discrete models P1 and P2 are
presented, their time discretization is also discussed.
   Explicit time integration remains today the most popular time discretization for highly nonlinear
problems. It is considered to be best suited for the simulation of short duration events characterized
by high frequency response, such as the response of a stiff structure to a blast load. Implicit time
discretization can be more effective for the simulation of long duration events. For these reasons,
both explicit and implicit time discretizations are considered here. More specifically, because of their
popularity and good numerical properties, the generalized-˛ method [28] and the explicit central
difference method are chosen as the representatives of implicit and explicit schemes, respectively.

2.1. Nonlinear FE models with constant mass matrices
When equipped with suitable initial conditions, model P1, which represents a large family of non-
linear FE structural dynamics models with only geometric and material nonlinearities, leads in the
undamped case to the following semi-discrete initial value problem
                               M uR C f i nt .u; „/ D f ext .t /
                                                                                                       (1)
                              u.0/ D u0        u.0/
                                               P    D uP 0      „.0/ D „0
where M is a constant FE symmetric positive definite mass matrix of dimension N , t denotes time,
the solution u.t / 2 RN is a time-dependent vector-valued displacement function also called dis-
placement by analogy with its physical interpretation, a dot denotes a time derivative, „.t / 2 RNi nt
is a time-dependent vector of Ni nt internal variables associated with some nonlinear constitutive
relation, the vector-valued function f i nt .u; „/ 2 RN corresponds to the internal forces, and the
time-dependent term f ext .t / 2 RN represents the external forces. The integer N denotes the num-
ber of DOFs of the model or problem (1). This model has also been dubbed so far as HDM. Its
extension to the damped case is straightforward and not discussed here because of space limitation.
   The formulation of the generalized-˛ method is outlined in Table I, where t denotes the com-
putational time-step (which does not have to be constant). Its application to the solution of problem
(1) is summarized in Table II. Like all other implicit schemes, this method incurs at each time-
step the solution of a large-scale linearized system of equations of dimension N . In this case, this
system is obtained by first expressing uR nC1˛m as a function of unC1˛f and the known state of
the solution at time tn using the recurrences and time averagings defined in Table I, then substi-
tuting the obtained expression in the equations of equilibrium governing problem (1), and finally
linearizing these equations around the iterate ujnC1˛f . In Equation (3) within Table II, K dyn is the
dynamic tangent stiffness matrix – that is, the Jacobian of the force residual vector with respect to

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                                          10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                                          629


       Table I. The generalized-˛ method for nonlinear structural dynamics models of the form P1.

   1. Equilibrium
                                                                         
                           M uR nC1˛m C f i nt unC1˛f ; „n  f ext tnC1˛f D 0
   2. Initial conditions
                                                                                               
                           given u0 ; uP 0 ; „0 ;   uR 0 D M 1 f ext .t0 /  f i nt .u0 ; „0 /
   3. Recurrences
                                                                             
                                                  1
        unC1 D un C t uP n C t 2                2 ˇ       uR n C ˇ uR nC1            uP nC1 D uP n C t ..1   / uR n C  uR nC1 /
   4. Time averagings
                tnC1˛f D .1  ˛f /tnC1 C ˛f tn                        unC1˛f D .1  ˛f /unC1 C ˛f un
                uP nC1˛f D .1  ˛f /uP nC1 C ˛f uP n                      uR nC1˛m D .1  ˛m /uR nC1 C ˛m uR n


Table II. Application of the implicit generalized-˛ method to nonlinear structural dynamics models of the
                                                 form P1.

 1. Time-stepping
                                ./n       ./nC1
 2. Initializations/predictions
                                                            
                                                    .1˛f /          .1˛f /.2ˇ /
           u0nC1˛         D unuP 0nC1˛ D 1 C          ˇ
                                                               uP n C      2ˇ
                                                                                     t uR n
                    f                    f
                                                 
           uR 0nC1˛m D  1˛m
                           ˇt n
                                uP C ˛m     1
                                           2ˇ
                                               C 1 uR n
 3. Newton iterations (designated by the superscript j )
      (a) incremental solution
                                                                               
                    j                                   j                j
            K dyn unC1˛ ; „n u D f ext tnC1˛f  M uR nC1˛m  f i nt unC1˛ ; „n                                                 .2/
                                 f                                                                                     f
          where
                                                                                                         
                              j                                   1˛m                         j
                       K dyn unC1˛ ; „n D                                  M CK             unC1˛ ; „n               .3/
                                              f               ˇ .1˛f /t 2                            f
      (b) iterate updates
                    j C1               j                            j C1            j         
                   unC1˛       D unC1˛ C u                    uP nC1˛       D uP nC1˛ C ˇt u
                            f                 f                             f                  f
                      j C1        j           1˛m
                   uR nC1˛m D uR nC1˛m C             u
                                           ˇ .1˛f /t
      (c) convergence check
 4. State update
                       1
                                                                               1
                                                                                                                  
              unC1 D 1˛      unC1˛f  ˛f un                         uP nC1 D 1˛             uP nC1˛f  ˛f uP n
                                 f                                                       f
                         1
                                                  
              uR nC1 D 1˛ m
                               uR nC1˛m  ˛m uR n


            Table III. Time-discretization of nonlinear structural dynamics problems of the form
                              P1 using the explicit central difference method.

              1. Time-stepping
                                                             ./n      ./nC1
              2. Displacement update
                                                                                                   2
                                                             unC1 D un C t uP n C t2 uR n
              3. Acceleration update
                                                                                                             
                                                             uR nC1 D M 1 f ext .tnC1 /  f i nt .unC1 ; „n /
              4. Velocity update
                                                             uP nC1 D uP n C t
                                                                             2 .u
                                                                                R n C uR nC1 /


Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                 Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                                   DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
630                                           C. FARHAT ET AL.


the displacement vector. Because in model P1 the inertial forces depend linearly on the unknown
time-averaged displacement unC1˛f , K dyn is in this case simply a linear combination of the static
tangent stiffness matrix K (defined as the Jacobian of f i nt .u; „/ with respect to u) and the mass
matrix M .
   As in all implicit time-integration schemes, the total cost of each solution update performed by
the generalized-˛ method is dominated by that of the solution of the linearized sub-problem
                                                                                                  (2).
However, the cost associated with the evaluation of the internal force vector f i nt unC1˛f ; „n
may also be significant, particularly for higher-order spatial discretizations and/or some constitutive
laws.
   The explicit central difference method can be viewed as a particular instance of the generalized-˛
method obtained by setting ˛m D ˛f D ˇ D 0 and  D 1=2 in Table I. Its explicit charac-
ter requires that M be a lumped (diagonal) mass matrix. The application of this method to the
solution of problem (1) is summarized in Table III. Its computational cost is dominated by that
of the evaluation of the vector of internal forces, which is also true for most if not all explicit
time-integration schemes.

2.2. Nonlinear FE models with configuration-dependent mass matrices
Model P2 represents an even larger family of nonlinear FE structural dynamics models than model
P1. Its sources of nonlinearities include not only geometric and material nonlinearities but also
nonlinear inertial forces and configuration-dependent external forces. When equipped with suitable
initial conditions, this model leads to the following semi-discrete initial value problem
                       M.'/a C C.'; v/v C f i nt .'; „/ D f ext .'; t /
                                                                                                        (4)
                                  '.0/ D '0        v.0/ D v0      „.0/ D „0
where the solution '.t / 2 C is a time-dependent manifold-valued generalized displacement func-
tion, M.'/ denotes a generalized mass matrix of dimension N and is in general unsymmetric
and configuration dependent, C.'; v/ is a coefficient matrix associated with the velocity-dependent
inertial forces and is also configuration dependent, the vector-valued function f i nt .'; „/ 2 RN
is the vector of generalized internal forces, the time-dependent and configuration-dependent term
f ext .'; t / 2 RN denotes the vector of generalized external forces, a 2 RN is the vector of
generalized accelerations, and v 2 RN denotes the vector of generalized velocities.
   The functional form of (4) can represent the evolution of a dynamical system composed of ele-
ments with both translational and rotational DOFs – for example, rigid or flexible rod and shell
elements, Cosserat solids, or torsional springs. The generalized displacement of such a system may
be represented by a set of absolute nodal translations u and rotation variables ƒ, that is,
                                               ' D ¹u; ƒº                                               (5)
Each translation variable in the subset u belongs to the linear space R3 , whereas each rotation
variable in the subset ƒ belongs to the group of special orthogonal transformations SO.3/. This
group, which is a naturally occurring example of a manifold of dimension 3, is defined as
                              ®                                               ¯
                   SO.3/ D ƒi 2 R33 W ƒTi ƒi D ƒi ƒTi D I; det.ƒi / D 1                     (6)
where I is the identity matrix and the superscript T designates the transpose operation. An element
of SO.3/ is commonly referred to as a rotation matrix or a rotation tensor. Assuming without any
loss of generality that each of the np nodes of the FE model has both translational and rotational
DOFs and thus N D 6np , the configuration manifold of the system is defined as the N -dimensional
product manifold
                                           C D R3np  SO.3/np                                           (7)
that is, the np fold Cartesian product of R3  SO.3/ with itself.
   The equations of motion describing the evolution of the system – that is, the equations of equi-
librium governing problem (4) – are the Newton–Euler equations describing the balance of the rates

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                         Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                             10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                           631

of linear and angular momenta. These equations can be expressed using generalized forces – that is,
vectors comprising forces and moments – related to a fixed or ‘inertial’ reference frame (the spa-
tial setting). Alternatively, they can be expressed using generalized forces related to one or more
moving, body-attached reference frames (the convected setting). In what follows, the spatial setting
is chosen for the description of the equations of motion. However, because of the specific choices
of the representative temporal discretization schemes, it is convenient to use the convected angular
velocity  and angular acceleration A to define the generalized velocity and acceleration vectors,
respectively. Hence, v and a are written as
                                                              
                                         uP                      uR
                                  vD              and     aD                                     (8)
                                                                A

where the convected angular velocity vector  and its time derivative, the convected angular
acceleration vector A, are defined as [29]

                                   Œ D ƒT ƒ
                                             P       and        P
                                                              AD                                     (9)

In Equation (9) and throughout the remainder of this paper, boldface letters denote diagonal or
block-diagonal matrices, which are the matrix direct sum of a set of 3  3 matrices associated with
the nodes of a FE model. For example,
                                                2                   3
                                                  ƒ1 0 : : : 0
                                  Mnp           6 0 ƒ2 : : : 0 7
                                                6                   7
                            ƒD             ƒi D 6 :: :: : :      :: 7
                                      i D1      4 : :        : : 5
                                                   0 0 : : : ƒnp

The operator Œ designates the skew-symmetric block-diagonal matrix form of the set of axial
three-dimensional vectors to which the operator is applied. For example,
                                              2                     3
                                      M  n
                                                  0 i´ iy
                                  def      p
                             Œ D           4 i´      0 ix 5
                                         i D1
                                                iy ix        0

   If a mass and inertial lumping approach is used to define the spatially discrete inertial force,
for example, to facilitate explicit time discretization, the configuration-dependent generalized mass
matrix and the coefficient matrix of the velocity-dependent inertial forces corresponding to the
spatial description of the equations of motion can be expressed in the following form:
                                                                         
                            m 0                             0     0          0 0
                   M D                    and       C D                  D     P                 (10)
                            0 ƒJ                            0 ƒŒ J        0 ƒJ

where m is a diagonal mass matrix associated with the translational accelerations, J is the (constant)
block-diagonal inertia matrix associated with the angular accelerations, and the first of relations (9)
as well as the property ƒT ƒ D I have been used.
   A special variant of the generalized-˛ method [28] is chosen here to perform an implicit time
discretization of problem (4). This algorithm is based on the generalization of the implicit midpoint
rule to the SO.3/ manifold presented in [30] and referred to therein as ALGO C1. Noting that the
implicit midpoint rule is a special case of the generalized-˛ method corresponding to the choice
of parameters ˛m D ˛f D  D 1=2 and ˇ D 1=4, one can observe that ALGO C1 admits
a straightforward extension to include optional numerical dissipation using the framework of the
generalized-˛ method. The formulation of this variant of the generalized-˛ method – including
optional numerical dissipation – is outlined in Table IV.
   The presentation of the time discretization equations for problem (4) is facilitated by the introduc-
tion of d.t I n/ 2 RN , a time-dependent vector-valued family of generalized displacement functions
– parametrized by the time-step index n – comprising both displacements and incremental rotation

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                       Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                         DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                              10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
632                                                          C. FARHAT ET AL.


       Table IV. The generalized-˛ method for nonlinear structural dynamics models of the form P2.

      1. Equilibrium
                                                                              
             M 'nC1˛f anC1˛m C C 'nC1˛f ; vnC1˛f vnC1˛f C f i nt 'nC1˛f ; „n
                                              
                       f ext 'nC1˛f ; tnC1˛f D 0
      2. Initial conditions
                                                                                                       
              given '0 ; v0 ; „0 ;   a0 D M.'0 /1 f ext .'0 ; t0 /  f i nt .'0 ; „0 /  C.'0 ; v0 /v0
      3. Recurrences
                                                                       
                                                  1
           dnC1 D dn C t vn C t 2               2 ˇ       an C ˇanC1       vnC1 D vn C t ..1   / an C anC1 /
      4. Time averagings
                       tnC1˛f D .1  ˛f /tnC1 C ˛f tn                dnC1˛f D .1  ˛f /dnC1 C ˛f dn
                       vnC1˛f D .1  ˛f /vnC1 C ˛f vn                  anC1˛m D .1  ˛m /anC1 C ˛m an


unknowns, the latter being defined by a vectorial parametrization of SO.3/ [31]. Hence, the vector
of generalized displacements can be written as
                                                 
                                                      u
                                      d.t I n/ D                                              (11)
                                                   ‰ƒn .ƒ/
The subscripting of d according to the time-step index used in Table IV should be interpreted as
dn D d.tn I n/ and dnC D d.tnC I n/. The incremental rotation variables ‰ƒn used in the definition
of d are the set of right/material incremental axis–angle rotation vectors at each node and for which
the increment is measured with respect to the reference configuration identified by the subscript –
in this case, ƒn . More specifically, ‰ƒn .ƒ/ is the particular mapping from the manifold SO.3/np
to its tangent space at the point ƒn defined by
                                                               
                                       Œ‰ƒn .ƒ/ D log ƒTn ƒ                                    (12)

where log denotes the principal matrix logarithm function.
   The application of the implicit generalized-˛ method to the solution of problem (4) is summarized
in Table V. This method incurs at each time-step the solution of a large-scale linearized system of
equations of dimension N . In this case, this system is obtained by first expressing vnC1˛f and
anC1˛m in terms of the ‘midpoint’ configuration 'nC1˛f and the known state of the solution
at time tn using the recurrences and time averagings defined in Table IV, then substituting the
obtained expressions in the equations of equilibrium governing problem (4), and finally linearizing
                                      j
these equations around the iterate 'nC1˛      f
                                                 . The procedure for defining the linearized system of
equations, and the subsequent state update (which is characterized by a multiplicative update of the
rotational subset of the manifold-valued configuration ' involving the inverse of the principal matrix
logarithm and, therefore, the matrix exponential exp) follow from the generalization of Newton’s
method to the functions defined on a manifold [32].
   The presentation of the linearized equations for problem (4) is facilitated by the introduction
of p.t I n; j / 2 RN , a time-dependent vector-valued family of generalized displacement functions
parametrized by both the time-step index n and the Newton iterate index j . Each instance of this
family of generalized displacement functions comprises both displacements and incremental rota-
tion unknowns. The latter unknowns are defined by a chosen vectorial parametrization of SO.3/,
which is not necessarily the same as (11). Hence, p.t I n; j / can be written as
                                                   "               #
                                                           u
                                   p.t I n; j / D        j     .ƒ/
                                                       ƒ             nC1˛f


where the rotation variables             j
                                       ƒnC1˛
                                                       are the set of left/spatial incremental axis–angle rotation
                                                   f
vectors at each node and for which the increment is measured with respect to a reference con-
figuration identified by the subscript – in this case, ƒjnC1˛f . More specifically, ƒj   .ƒ/
                                                                                                              nC1˛f


Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                              10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                            633

Table V. Application of the implicit generalized-˛ method to nonlinear structural dynamics models of the
                                                form P2.

 1. Time-stepping
                                  ./n    ./nC1
 2. Initializations/predictions
                                                   
                    0                  0             un
                   'nC1˛   D 'n     dnC1˛     D
                          f                  f        0
                                            
                    0               .1˛f /         .1˛f /.2ˇ /
                   vnC1˛   D 1C       ˇ
                                               vn C       2ˇ
                                                                    t an
                         f
                                                       
                    0
                   anC1˛ m
                            D  1˛m
                                 ˇt n
                                      v C ˛m    1
                                               2ˇ
                                                    C 1 an
 3. Newton iterations (designated by the superscript j )
     (a) incremental solution
                                                                             
                              j                     j                     j          j
                     K dyn 'nC1˛ ; „n p D f ext 'nC1˛ ; tnC1˛f  M 'nC1˛ anC1˛m
                                   f                    f                       f
                                                                           
                                    j       j       j               j
                               C 'nC1˛ ; vnC1˛ vnC1˛  f i nt 'nC1˛ ; „n     (13)
                                                    f            f          f                     f
         where
                                                "                    #
                                                        u
                                         p D        ƒj
                                                        nC1˛f
     (b) iterate updates
                                                             j C1           j
                                                            unC1˛       D unC1˛ C u
                        °                ±                           f
                                                                               "
                                                                                 f
                                                                                                  # !
          j C1            j C1     j C1
         'nC1˛        D unC1˛ ; ƒnC1˛                     j C1                                        j
                   f              f             f
                                                            ƒnC1˛       D exp         ƒj              ƒnC1˛
                                                                  f                      nC1˛f                f
                        2
                        j C1
                                                3                                                  
                       unC1˛                           h             i                
          j C1                                                   j C1               j C1
         dnC1˛ D 4                5                                     D log ƒT
                               f
                                                           ‰ƒn ƒnC1˛           n ƒnC1˛
               f           j C1                                            f                            f
                    ‰ƒn ƒnC1˛
                                 f
                                                       
          j C1         j            j C1         j
         vnC1˛    D vnC1˛ C tˇ   dnC1˛  dnC1˛
                   f       f               f          f
                                                             
           j C1        j                      j C1      j
         anC1˛m D anC1˛m C 21˛m           dnC1˛  dnC1˛
                              t ˇ .1˛f /          f       f
     (c) convergence check
 4. State update
                                                        1
                                                                    
                                                  unC1˛f  ˛f un
                                                unC1 D 1˛
              'nC1 D ¹unC1 ; ƒnC1 º                            
                                                                 f
                                                                         
                                                     1
                                     ƒnC1 D ƒn exp 1˛    ‰ƒn ƒnC1˛f
                       1
                                                     f
                                                         1
                                                                              
              vnC1 D 1˛    vnC1˛f  ˛f vn   anC1 D 1˛   m
                                                               anC1˛m  ˛m an
                             f




is the particular mapping from the manifold SO.3/np to its tangent space at the point ƒjnC1˛f
defined by
                                                               
                                                         kT
                               ƒ
                                 j     .ƒ/    D log  ƒƒ  nC1˛f
                                          nC1˛f
                                                             
Note the usage here of the lower case to denote a left/spatial incremental rotation vector, and that
of the upper case ‰ in (12) to denote a right/material incremental rotation vector.
    The right-hand side of the linearized sub-problem (13) is the negative of the force residual con-
structed by evaluating the equilibrium equations described in Table IV at the iterate configuration
  j                    j                           j
'nC1˛   f
           , velocity vnC1˛ f
                               , and acceleration anC1˛m
                                                          . The dynamic tangent stiffness matrix K dyn
appearing in the left-hand side of this linearized sub-problem is the Jacobian of the force residual
with respect to the vector of generalized displacements p. It can be expressed as the sum of the static
tangent stiffness matrix K due to the internal and some external forces, and a contributory term due
itself to the inertial forces as shown in Appendix A of this paper. Unlike in the case of model P1,
this second term is not simply equal to a scalar multiple of the mass matrix M . Furthermore, the

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                          10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
634                                                  C. FARHAT ET AL.


   Table VI. Time discretization of reduced nonlinear structural dynamics problems of the form P2 using
                                  the explicit central difference method.

      1. Time-stepping
                                                          ./n    ./nC1
      2. Velocity update at half time-step
                                              vnC 1 D vn C t
                                                           2 an
                                                     2
      3. Configuration update
                                                                                  2
                                                     unC1 D un C t uP n C t2 uR n
                     'nC1 D ¹unC1 ; ƒnC1 º                        h                2
                                                                                      i 
                                                     ƒnC1 D ƒn exp t n C t2 An
                                                                                              
      4. Acceleration update
                                                                                                            
                anC1 D M .'nC1 /1 f ext .'nC1 ; tnC1 /  C 'nC1 ; vnC 1 vnC 1  f i nt .'nC1 ; „n /
                                                                                  2       2
      5. Velocity update
                                    vnC1 D vnC 1 C t
                                                   2 anC1
                                                 2




dynamic tangent stiffness is in general an unsymmetric matrix, although it can be well approximated
by its symmetric part for a large subclass of problems – specifically, problems for which (i) the
rotary inertia and/or the angular velocities and accelerations are small to moderate and (ii) the static
tangent stiffness matrix is either symmetric or well approximated by its symmetric part.
   The application of the explicit central difference method to the solution of problem (4) is
summarized in Table VI.


                      3. LOW-DIMENSIONAL SUBSPACE APPROXIMATIONS

The main problem addressed in this paper is the effective and computationally efficient nonlinear
reduction of the discrete counterparts of the initial value problems (1) and (4). The solution to this
problem begins in this section with the low-dimensional approximation of the unknowns of both
models P1 and P2.


3.1. Nonlinear FE models of the form P1
The construction of a ROM for nonlinear FE models of the form P1 is discussed in Section 4. It
is based on the assumption that the solution of problem (1) can be approximated in a well-chosen
subspace of low dimension k  N as follows

                                              u.t /  uc C Vy.t /                                                  (14)

where uc 2 RN is a fixed constant vector (typically chosen as the initial displacement u0 ) and the
columns of V 2 RN k define a ROB. Hence, differentiating (14) with respect to time gives

                                         uP  V yP        and      uR  V yR                                       (15)

where y.t / 2 Rk is often referred to as the vector of (time-dependent) reduced coordinates. Given
V , the associated reduced linear subspace of dimension k is the column span of V denoted by span
V  RN .
   Without any loss of generality, the low-dimensional approximation of the unknowns of model P1
is carried out throughout the remainder of this paper using

                                                         uc D 0

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                   Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                     DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                             635

3.2. Nonlinear FE models of the form P2
The construction of a ROM for model P2, which is also discussed in Section 4, is more delicate than
that of a ROM for model P1. This construction is based here on the assumption that an approxima-
tion of a form similar to that of (14) can be post-processed by applying a well-chosen mapping to
obtain the following approximation of the solution of problem (4)
                                       '.t /  1 ..'c / C Vy.t //                                   (16)
where 'c 2 C is a fixed constant configuration (typically chosen as the initial configuration '0 ) and
 is a mapping from C to RN (or more precisely, a space locally isomorphic to RN ).
   Ideally, the mapping  should be invertible, continuous, and of minimal dimension. Unfortu-
nately, there is no such single chart that covers all of SO.3/ [33]. Therefore, the alternatives are to
construct a subspace approximation that is (i) restricted to a particular range of motions, (ii) not of
minimal dimension, or (iii) computationally intensified by the use of multiple charts. Here, a for-
mulation belonging to the first of these three alternative categories is proposed. This formulation
is related to the linearized variant of the principal geodesic analysis method [34], which itself is a
generalization of the PCA method to models defined on a manifold.
   To this effect, let
                                                   
                                                        u
                                           q.t / D                                                (17)
                                                     ‰I .ƒ/
denote the vector of time-dependent generalized displacements where the rotation variables ‰I are
the set of total axis–angle rotation vectors at each node measured with respect to a reference configu-
ration identified, as before, by the subscript – in this case, the unrotated configuration designated by
the subscript identity I . Hence, the rotation variables ‰I are defined here by a vectorial parametriza-
tion of SO.3/. More specifically, ‰I .ƒ/ is defined by the following mapping from the manifold
SO.3/np to its tangent space at the point I
                                           Œ‰I .ƒ/ D log .ƒ/                                         (18)
In particular, note that whereas the generalized displacement vector d.t I n/ (11) based on the incre-
mental rotation vector unknowns is not a single function – because the base point of the values of
‰ƒn (12) changes from one time-step to another – the generalized displacement vector q.t / (17)
is a single function, because all values of ‰I represent rotations that are measured with respect to
a common base point. For this reason, among these two generalized displacement definitions, only
q.t / allows a sensible collection of snapshots of the solution of problem (4) that can be compressed,
for example, by the SVD – or equivalently the POD – method to construct a ROB V in which a
low-dimensional approximation of the solution of problem P2 can be constructed. Expressing this
approximation as
                                                           
                                   u             uc            Vu
                      q.t / D                            C          y D qc C Vy                  (19)
                                ‰I .ƒ/        ‰I .ƒc /         V‰
where, as before, uc 2 R3np is a fixed constant vector and ƒc 2 SO.3/np is a set of fixed rotation
matrices calls for re-writing problem (4) in terms of the vector of reduced coordinates y and its time
derivatives. This can be accomplished as follows.
   First, the well-known expressions of the angular velocity  and acceleration A in terms of the
rotation parameters ‰I are recalled (for example, see [35])
                                                                               
                     D T.‰I /‰  PI     and      A D T.‰I /‰    RI CTP ‰I ; ‰PI ‰ PI              (20)
                                                                         
Here, the tangent operator T.‰I / and its time derivative T   P ‰I ; ‰P I are block-diagonal matrices
given by
                            Mnp sin i        1  cos i            i  sin i
                T.‰I / D                 I        2
                                                         Œ‰I i  C             ‰I i ‰ITi
                               i D1 i           i                      i3

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                         Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                  10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
636                                              C. FARHAT ET AL.


and
           Mnp i cos i  sin i  T                                                   
  P ‰I ; ‰
  T      PI D                            ‰I i ‰P I i I  i sin i C 2 cos i  2 ‰ITi ‰
                                                                                       P I i Œ‰
                                3                                        4
                 i D1         i                                       i
                3 sin i  2i  i cos i             
              C                              ‰ITi ‰P I i ‰I i ‰ITi
                            i5
                cos i  1 P          i  sin i  P                          
              C       2
                             ‰I i  C        3
                                                        ‰I i ‰ITi C ‰I i ‰
                                                                         P ITi
                    i                     i
with

                                                 i D k‰I i k2

For i < , the functions of i appearing earlier can be computed using the first few terms of their
Taylor series expansions around i D 0. Then, substituting the approximations (20) and (19) into
(8) leads to the following expressions of the generalized velocity v and acceleration a in terms of y
and yP
                                             
                          Vu                    I           0
       v                               yP D                             V yP
              T .‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y/ V‰            0 T .‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y/
            
                                          Vu yR
       a                                                                                        (21)
              T .‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y/ V‰ yR C TP .‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y; V‰ y/
                                                                   P V‰ yP
                                                       
                        I          0                      0             0
                   D                             V yR C     P .‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y; V‰ y/  V yP
                        0 T .‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y/             0T                       P

   Re-writing problem (4) in terms of the vector of reduced coordinates y defined in (19) also calls
for expressing the approximation (16) of the time-dependent generalized displacement function '
(5) in terms of y. Noting that the principal matrix logarithm log introduced in Equation (18) is
invertible and that its inverse is the matrix exponential exp, this equation can be re-written as

                                             ƒ D exp .Œ‰I .ƒ/ /

which in view of (19) and (18) leads to

                                       ƒ D exp .Œ‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y /

It follows that expression (5) can be re-written as

                               '  ¹uc C Vu y; exp .Œ‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y /º                                 (22)

   Without any loss of generality, the low-dimensional approximation of the unknowns of model P2
is carried out throughout the remainder of this paper using

                                       uc D 0        and      ƒc D I

Noting that ‰I .I / D 0, it follows that (22) simplifies to

                                           '  ¹Vu y; exp .ŒV‰ y /º                                     (23)

and (21) simplifies to
                                
                                    I    0
                           v                 V yP
                                    0 T.V‰ y/
                                                                                                        (24)
                                    I    0             0        0
                           a                 V yR C                     V yP
                                    0 T.V‰ y/          0 TP .V‰ y; V‰ y/
                                                                      P

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                            Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                              DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                     10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                   637

3.3. Consistency
In [25], the following notion of consistency of a ROM approximation was introduced and shown
to constitute a best practice guideline for the reduction of a dynamical system. This notion is also
adopted in this paper.
   Consistent approximation: Let ns denote the total number of time-dependent solution snapshots
collected offline at each computational time-step of a simulation performed with an HDM, for the
purpose of constructing a ROB. Then, a projection-based ROM approximation based on this ROB
is said to be consistent if, when computed without data compression – that is, with V 2 RN ns
– it introduces no additional error in the solution of the same problem for which the snapshots
were acquired.

           4. NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTIONS VIA GALERKIN PROJECTIONS

In this work, all ROBs V are computed as follows. For nonlinear FE dynamic models of the form
P1, snapshots un D u.tn / of the solution of problem (1) are collected for a given input (generalized
external force). For nonlinear FE models of the form P2, snapshots qn D q.tn / (17) of the solution
of problem (4) are collected instead. Next, these snapshots are compressed using the SVD – or
equivalently, the POD – method. Hence, all ROBs V computed in this work have full column rank.
The generalization of this construction procedure to multiple inputs or, more generally, n% model
parameter sets
                                           %i ;    i D 1;    ; n%                                         (25)
defining multiple instances of the models P1 and P2 is straightforward. It leads to the well-known
notion of a global ROB associated with a global training.
   Then, it remains to determine the vector of reduced coordinates y.t / 2 Rk and its first and second
time derivatives. At least two approaches are available for this purpose. They are outlined later.
   The first approach operates at the discrete level. It begins with the definition of one or more
discrete residuals associated with the solution, at each time instance denoted here simply by tnC1 ,
of relevant discrete problems. For example when time discretization is performed using an implicit
scheme, the following discrete residual is most relevant [25]
                                     RnC1 .w/ D K lhs w  fnrhs                                            (26)
where K   lhs
             DK    dy n
                       and w D u for model P1, K           DKlhs       N dyn
                                                                        and w D q for model P2,
and fnrhs is a right-hand side that depends on known quantities and quantities computed at time tn .
At each implicit time-step, this residual arises at each Newton iteration but vanishes for the HDM at
the convergence of these iterations.
   Then, ynC1 is determined incrementally by writing ynC1 D yn Cy, substituting this expression
into the low-dimensional approximation (14) for model P1 or its counterpart (19) for model P2 at
t D tnC1 to essentially obtain
                                                  w  Vy                                                   (27)
and solving the minimization problem
                y D arg min jjRnC1 .´/jjB1 D arg min jjK lhs V´  fnrhs jjB1                              (28)
                           ´2Rk                              ´2Rk

where B1 denotes a chosen metric. By definition, the approximation (27) and the consequent
approximations unC1 D V .yn C y/ for model P1 and qnC1 D V .yn C y/ for model P2 are
referred to in this case as optimal approximations because they result from the solution of a residual
minimization problem. The corresponding approximations of uP nC1 .vnC1 / and uR nC1 .anC1 / are typ-
ically straightforward. When time discretization is performed using an explicit scheme, two discrete
residuals are similarly defined. For example, for model P1 (see Table III), two such residuals are

                              u                                             t 2
                             RnC1 .unC1 / D unC1  un  t uP n                 uR n                        (29)
                                                                             2
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                               Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                 DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                 10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
638                                            C. FARHAT ET AL.


and

                 uP                         t             ext                      
                RnC1 .uP nC1 / D uP nC1        uR n C M 1 fnC1  f i nt .unC1 ; „n /                    (30)
                                            2
Both of these residuals vanish for the HDM at each explicit time-step. In this case, ynC1 is first
determined as follows:

                           u                                                            t 2
         ynC1 D arg min jjRnC1 .V ´/jjB1 D arg min jjV ´  Vyn  tV yPn                    V yRn jjB1
                       ´2Rk                          ´2Rk                                2
                             t 2
      ) ynC1 D yn C t yPn C      yRn           8B1 ; because V has full column rank
                              2
Then, yPnC1 is computed as follows:
                                uP
             yPnC1 D arg min jjRnC1 .V Ṕ /jjB1                                                           (31)
                           Ṕ 2Rk
                                    t                 ext                        
                    D arg min jjV Ṕ    V yRn C M 1 fnC1     f i nt .VynC1 ; „n / jjB1
                           Ṕ 2Rk    2
                    t                                  ext                        
          ) yPnC1 D     yRn C .V T B1 V /1 V T B1 M 1 fnC1   f i nt .VynC1 ; „n /                      (32)
                    2
Again, both approximations unC1  VynC1 and uP nC1  V yPnC1 are referred to in this case as
optimal for the same reason as that explained earlier, and the corresponding approximation of uP nC1
and uR nC1 is typically straightforward.
   The second approach can equally operate at the semi-discrete and discrete levels. It consists of
performing a Galerkin projection of each introduced residual on the subspace of approximation
spanned by the columns of V and computing the solution of the resulting problem. For example, at
the discrete level, it leads to solving a problem of the form

                      V T B2 RnC1 .Vy/ D V T B2 K lhs Vy  V T B2 fnrhs D 0
                                                        1                                              (33)
                               ) y D V T B2 K lhs V         V T B2 fnrhs

when time discretization of model P1 or model P2 is performed using an implicit scheme, or a
problem of the form
                                                                                                
   T     uP                 T                 t              1
                                                                   ext      i nt
                                                                                              
 V B2 RnC1 .V yPnC1 / D V B2 V yPnC1              V yRn C M       fnC1  f .VynC1 ; „n /          D0
                                              2
                         t                                     ext                        
             ) yPnC1 D         yRn C .V T B2 V /1 V T B2 M 1 fnC1     f i nt .VynC1 ; „n /
                           2
                                                                                                   (34)
when time discretization of model P1 is performed using an explicit scheme. Here, B2 denotes
another chosen metric. Equation (33) defines a nonlinear FE structural dynamics implicit ROM,
and Equation (34) defines its explicit counterpart. It can be shown that the approximations unC1 D
V .yn C y/ for model P1 and qnC1 D V .yn C y/ for model P2 delivered by each of these two
ROMs are also optimal because of the following:
   In the implicit case, these approximations are equal to their counterparts obtained using the
                                                       T
    first approach outlined earlier when B2 D K lhs B1 if K lhs is symmetric positive definite, or
                1
    B1 D K lhs and B2 D I otherwise.
   In the explicit case, they are equal to their counterparts obtained using the first approach when
    B1 D B2 .
In this work, the semi-discrete version of the second approach summarized by Equations (33) and
(34) is selected for determining y.t /. This approach and the nonlinear ROMs it leads to are described
in the remainder of this section.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                          Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                             10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                           639

4.1. Reduced FE models with constant mass matrices
Here, the computed ROB V is assumed to be M -orthonormal – that is, to satisfy

                                                      V TMV D I                                                      (35)

This can be simply achieved by equipping the SVD – or alternatively, the POD – method with the
metric defined by the symmetric positive definite matrix M . In this case, substituting the approxima-
tions (14) and (15) into (1) and pre-multiplying the resulting semi-discrete equation by V T B2 D I /
leads to the following initial value problem in the vector of reduced coordinates y.t /

                                                        yR C V T f i nt .Vy; „/ D V T f ext .t /
                                                                                                                     (36)
                      y.0/ D V T M u0            y.0/
                                                 P    D V T M uP 0              „.0/ D „0
which is referred to in the remainder of this paper as problem or nonlinear (semi-discrete) ROM
P1R. The temporal discretization of this problem by the generalized-˛ method, which for ˛m D
˛f D ˇ D 0 and  D 1=2 becomes the explicit central difference method, is summarized in
Table VII. Its application to the solution of problem (36) is summarized in Tables VIII and IX for
the implicit and explicit cases, respectively.
   When the initial value problem (36) is time integrated using the implicit generalized-˛ method,
the total cost of each solution update is dominated by the cost of the construction of the reduced
tangent stiffness matrix
                                                                         
                                j                              j
                      Krdy n ynC1˛   f
                                        ; „ n   D V T dyn
                                                     K      Vy nC1˛ f
                                                                       ; „n   V               (37)

and reduced vector of the balance of the external and internal forces
                                                                                         
                           j                                                         j
 frext tnC1˛f fri nt ynC1˛    f
                                   ; „ n   D V T
                                                   f ext
                                                           t nC1˛ f
                                                                        f i nt
                                                                                  VynC1˛ f
                                                                                            ; „n    (38)

governing the reduced system of linear equations (37) shown in Table VIII. Indeed, even though
these quantities are of dimension k, the cost of their construction scales with the size N of the
underlying HDM. On the other hand, the cost of the solution of the system of equations (37) scales
with the reduced dimension k.
   Similarly, when problem (36) is time integrated using the explicit central difference method, the
total cost of each solution update is dominated by that of the evaluation of the reduced vector of the
balance of the external and internal forces (38).
Remark 1
Throughout the remainder of this paper, the subscript r introduced in (37) and (38) is used to
designate the reduced counterpart of an HDM quantity. More specifically, indexing a matrix with


      Table VII. The generalized-˛ method for nonlinear structural dynamics ROMs of the form P1R.

 1. Equilibrium
                                                                            
                        yRnC1˛m C V T f i nt VynC1˛f ; „n  V T f ext tnC1˛f D 0
 2. Initial conditions (given u0 ; uP 0 ; „0 )
                                                                                                       
                  y0 D V T M u 0         yP0 D V T M uP 0     yR0 D V T f ext .t0 /  f i nt .u0 ; „0 /
 3. Recurrences
                                                                                    
                                                            1
                        ynC1 D yn C t yPn C t 2           2 ˇ       yRn C ˇ yRnC1
                        yPnC1 D yPn C t ..1   / yRn C  yRnC1 /
 4. Time averagings
                  tnC1˛f D .1  ˛f /tnC1 C ˛f tn             ynC1˛f D .1  ˛f /ynC1 C ˛f yn
                  yPnC1˛f D .1  ˛f /yPnC1 C ˛f yPn               yRnC1˛m D .1  ˛m /yRnC1 C ˛m yRn


Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                       Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                         DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                                    10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
640                                                           C. FARHAT ET AL.


the subscript r designates the result of the post-multiplication and pre-multiplication of the HDM
version of this matrix by a ROB V and its transpose V T , respectively – that is,

                                                 r D V T V;             r 2 Rkk                                         (39)

Similarly, indexing a vector with the subscript r designates the result of the pre-multiplication of
the HDM version of this vector by the transpose of the ROB V – that is,

                                                         ]r D V T ];      ]r 2 Rk                                           (40)



  Table VIII. Application of the implicit generalized-˛ method to nonlinear structural dynamics ROMs
                                            of the form P1R.
   1. Time-stepping
                                          ./n       ./nC1
   2. Initializations/predictions
                                                          
              0                   0               .1˛f /            .1˛f /.2ˇ /
             ynC1˛       D yn yPnC1˛    D 1C       ˇ
                                                             yPn C t      2ˇ
                                                                                     yRn
                    f                  f
                                               
               0
             yRnC1˛m
                      D  1˛m
                           tˇ n
                                yP C ˛m   1
                                         2ˇ
                                             C 1 yRn

   3. Newton iterations (designated by the superscript j )
       (a) incremental solution
                                                                             
                             j                                          j
              V T K dyn VynC1˛ ; „n Vy D V T f ext tnC1˛f  f i nt VynC1˛ ; „n
                                           f                                                                   f

                                                                    j
                                                                 yRnC1˛m                                               (41)
           where
                                                                                                          
                                 j                                       1˛m                      j
                     V T K dyn VynC1˛ ; „n V D                                    I CVTK        VynC1˛ ; „n V         (42)
                                                     f               ˇ .1˛f /t 2                        f
       (b) iterate updates
                           j C1                  j                         j C1             j      
                         ynC1˛           D ynC1˛ C y                  yPnC1˛      D yPnC1˛ C tˇ y
                                      f                   f                       f                 f

                           j C1       j
                         yRnC1˛m D yRnC1˛m C 21˛m       y
                                              t ˇ .1˛f /
       (c) convergence check
   4. State update
                         1
                                                                                 1
                                                                                                              
                ynC1 D 1˛             ynC1˛f  ˛f yn                   yPnC1 D 1˛         yPnC1˛f  ˛f yPn
                                  f                                                     f

                          1
                                                
                yRnC1 D 1˛ m
                               yRnC1˛m  ˛m yRn


                 Table IX. Time discretization of reduced nonlinear structural dynamics
                  problems of the form P1R using the explicit central difference method.

                     1. Time-stepping
                                                              ./n     ./nC1
                     2. Reduced coordinates update
                                                                                                    2
                                                                     ynC1 D yn C t yPn C t2 yRn
                     3. Second time derivative of reduced coordinates update
                                                                                             
                                              yRnC1 D V T f ext .tnC1 /  f i nt .VynC1 ; „n /
                     4. First time derivative of reduced coordinates update
                                                              yPnC1 D yPn C t
                                                                            2 .yRn C yRnC1 /


Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                              Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                                DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                   10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                 641

4.2. Reduced FE models with configuration-dependent mass matrices
In this case, however, the computed ROB V is assumed to satisfy the orthonormality condition
                                               V T MI V D I                                                (43)
where
                                                           
                                                               m0
                                           MI D M.'I / D
                                                               0 J
and 'I D ¹0; I º designates the undeformed configuration.
  Then, substituting the approximations (24) and (23) into (4), pre-multiplying the angular momen-
tum balance equations by the tangent operator T.‰I /, and finally pre-multiplying the resulting
equation by V T lead after some algebraic manipulations to the following initial value problem
governing the vector of reduced coordinates y.t / (see Appendix B)
                                     P V yP C V T fNi nt .Vy; „/ D V T fNext .Vy; t /
     V T MN .Vy/V yR C V T CN .Vy; V y/
                                                 
               T          u0                T       I         0                               (44)
     y.0/ D V MI                  y.0/
                                  P    D V MI                          v       „.0/ D „0
                        ‰I .ƒ0 /                    0 T.‰I .ƒ0 //1 0
which is referred to in the remainder of this paper as problem or nonlinear (semi-discrete) ROM
P2Ra. If a mass and inertial lumping approach is used to define the spatially discrete inertial forces
as in (10), the associated configuration-dependent generalized mass matrix MN and the coefficient
matrix CN of the velocity-dependent inertial forces can be expressed in the following form
                 
                   m           0
         MN D
                   0 T.V‰ y/T JT.V‰ y/
                                                                                                 (45)
                   0                                   0
          CN D                   P .V‰ ; V‰ y/
                   0 T.V‰ y/T JT                                  P  T.V‰ y/1 JT.V‰ y/
                                            P C det.T.V‰ y// ŒV‰ y
The internal and external forces of model P2Ra are given by
                                
                       N i nt     I    0
                      f       D              f i nt .¹Vu y; exp.ŒV‰ y /º ; „/
                                  0 T.V‰ y/
                                
                       N ext      I    0
                      f       D              f ext .¹Vu y; exp.ŒV‰ y /º ; t /
                                  0 T.V‰ y/
The following closed form expressions for the determinant [36] and inverse [37] of the tangent
operator T.‰I / can be used to facilitate the evaluation of CN
                       Ynp 2.1  cos i /
        det .T.‰I // D
                          i D1       i2
                       Mnp        i sin i       2  2 cos i  i sin i            1
           T.‰I /1 D                        IC         2      2
                                                                           ‰I i ‰ITi C Œ‰I i 
                           i D1 2  2 cos i         2i  2i cos i                 2
For i < , the functions of i appearing earlier can be computed using the first few terms of their
Taylor series expansions around i D 0.
   The temporal discretization of problem (44) by the generalized-˛ method, which for ˛m D ˛f D
ˇ D 0 and  D 1=2 becomes the explicit central difference method, is summarized in Table X.
Its application to the solution of problem (44) is summarized in Table XI for the implicit case. In
this table, the dynamic tangent stiffness matrix KN dyn appearing in (46) is the Jacobian of the force
residual with respect to the vector of generalized displacements q. Its expression as the sum of a
static tangent stiffness matrix KN due to the internal and external forces and a contributory term due
to the inertial forces is given in Appendix C. In this case, the static tangent stiffness matrix KN is
related to its counterpart K – previously introduced in the definition of the dynamic tangent stiffness
matrix for the solution of problem P2 – by the following transformation
                                                                           
       N      I     0                                      I     0             I      0
     KD                    K .¹Vu y; exp.ŒV‰ y /º ; „/                  C                        (47)
              0 T.V‰ y/                                    0 T.V‰ y/T          0 S.W; V‰ y/

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                             Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                               DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                        10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
642                                                   C. FARHAT ET AL.


Table X. The (implicit) generalized-˛ method for nonlinear structural dynamics ROMs of the form P2Ra.

 1. Equilibrium
                                                            
      V T MN VynC1˛f V yRnC1˛m C V T CN VynC1˛f ; V yPnC1˛f V yPnC1˛f
                                                                                
                                 CV T fNi nt VynC1˛f ; „n  V T fNext VynC1˛f ; t D 0
 2. Initial conditions (given '0 D ¹u0 ; ƒ0 º ; v0 ; „0 )
                                                          
                                u0                            I        0
             y0 D V T MI                     yP0 D V T MI                             v
                             ‰I .ƒ0 /                         0 T .‰I .ƒ0 //1 0
                                  1                                                                     
             yR0 D V T MN .Vy0 / V      V T fNext .Vy0 ; t0 /  CN .Vy0 ; V yP0 / V yP0  fNi nt .Vy0 ; „0 /
 3. Recurrences (same as in Table VII)
 4. Time averagings (same as in Table VII)


        Table XI. Application of the implicit generalized-˛ method to nonlinear structural dynamics
                                         ROMs of the form P2Ra.

         1. Time-stepping (same as in Table VIII)
         2. Initializations/predictions (same as in Table VIII)
         3. Newton iterations (designated by the superscript j )
             (a) incremental solution
                                                                                      
                                         j                                    j
                          V T KN dyn VynC1˛ ; „n Vy D V T f ext VynC1˛ ; tnC1˛f
                                             f                                 f   
                                       j            j                j          j       j
                            MN VynC1˛ V yRnC1˛m  CN VynC1˛ ; V yPnC1˛ V yPnC1˛
                                            f                         f          f       f
                                                          j
                                              fNi nt VynC1˛ ; „n         (47)
                                                                    f
             (b) iterate updates (same as in Table VIII)
             (c) convergence check (same as in Table VIII)
         4. State update (same as in Table VIII)


where
                  Mnp               
                                        i cos i  sin i            i sin i C 2 cos i  2
  S.W; ‰I / D                 sym                 3
                                                           Wi ‰ITi                            .Œ‰I i  Wi / ‰ITi
                       i D1                     i                               i4
                                            3 sin i  2i  i cos i  T       
                                         C               5
                                                                         ‰I i Wi ‰I i ‰ITi
                                                        i
                                                                                                        
                                           cos i  1            i  sin i  T                  T
                                                                                                       
                                                     ŒWi  C                  ‰I i Wi I C ‰I i Wi
                                                i2                  i3

sym./ denotes the symmetric part of a square matrix, W is the restriction of the out-of-balance
internal and external forces in the spatial description to the rotational DOFs, and for clarity, the
functional dependence of W on the state is not explicitly written.
   As in the case of problem P1R and for the same reason, the cost of each solution update produced
by the application of the implicit generalized-˛ method to problem P2Ra is dominated by that of
the construction of the reduced dynamic tangent stiffness matrix and reduced vectors of external,
inertial, and internal forces governing the system of linear equations (46) shown in Table XI.
   Note that for FE models of the form P2, the mass matrix MN (45) is not constant. For this reason,
the constant ROB V cannot be orthonormalized with respect to MN and is instead orthonormalized
with respect to MI (43). Consequently, the coefficient matrix associated with the acceleration-
dependent reduced inertial forces is neither constant nor diagonal, and the time discretization of
problem (44) by the explicit central difference method cannot be made computationally efficient.
More specifically, the explicit discretization of problem (44) requires in this case the construction
and factorization at each time-step of the reduced mass matrix V T MN .VynC1 /V ; therefore, it is
unlikely to be competitive with an implicit time discretization of the same problem. To address this
issue, an alternative formulation of problem P2Ra is proposed later in the text.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                  Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                    DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                            10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                            643

  Let
                                                        1
                                  Q D J T.V‰ y/T JT.V‰ y/    T.V‰ y/

Note that because T.V‰ y/T JT.V‰ y/ is a block-diagonal matrix, Q can be constructed efficiently.
   Substituting the approximations (24) and (23) into (4), pre-multiplying the angular momentum
balance equations by Q, pre-multiplying the resulting equation by V T , and accounting for the
orthonormality condition (43) lead after some algebraic manipulations to the following initial value
problem governing the vector of reduced coordinates y.t /

                                                         P V yP C V T fNi nt .Vy; „/ D V T fNext .Vy; t /
                                      yR C V T CN .Vy; V y/
                                                  
                       u0                            I       0
 y.0/ D V T MI                    y.0/
                                   P     D V T MI                      v       „.0/ D „0
                   ‰I .ƒ0 /                          0 T.‰I .ƒ0 //1 0
                                                                                                   (48)
which is referred to in the remainder of this paper as problem or nonlinear (semi-discrete) ROM
P2Rb. Unlike problem (44), problem (48) crucially exhibits a constant, diagonal reduced mass
matrix – specifically, the identity matrix I . Therefore, it is amenable to time discretization by an
explicit scheme. If mass and inertial lumping are used to define the spatially discrete inertial forces
as in (10), the coefficient matrix CN of model P2Rb can be expressed as
           
      N
      N      0                                          0
     C D                  1 P
             0 JT.V‰ y/ T .V‰ ; V‰ y/   P C det .T.V‰ y// Q.V‰ y/ ŒV‰ y P  T.V‰ y/1 JT.V‰ y/
and its internal and external forces are given by
                                 
                                   I     0
                       fNNi nt D                f i nt .¹Vu y; exp.ŒV‰ y /º ; „/
                                   0 Q.V‰ y/
                                 
                        N
                        N ext      I     0
                       f       D                f ext .¹Vu y; exp.ŒV‰ y /º ; t /
                                   0 Q.V‰ y/

               Table XII. The generalized-˛ method for nonlinear structural dynamics ROMs
                                            of the form P2Rb.

                 1. Equilibrium
                                                             
                      yRnC1˛m C V T CN VynC1˛f ; V yPnC1˛f V yPnC1˛f
                                                                                
                               CV T fNNi nt VynC1˛f ; „n  V T fNNext VynC1˛f ; t D 0
                 2. Initial conditions (same as in Table X)
                 3. Recurrences (same as in Table VII)
                 4. Time averagings (same as in Table VII)


   Table XIII. Time discretization of reduced nonlinear structural dynamics problems of the form P2Rb
                               using the explicit central difference method.

     1. Time-stepping (same as in Table IX)
     2. First time derivative of reduced coordinates update at half time-step
                                              yPnC 1 D yn C t
                                                            2 yRn
                                                  2
     3. Reduced coordinates update (same as in Table IX)
     4. Second time derivative of reduced coordinates update
                                                                                                        
              yRnC1  D V T fNext .t   nC1/  CN Vy      ; V yP
                                                      nC1        nC 1
                                                                            V yPnC 1  fNi nt .VynC1 ; „n /    (49)
                                                                    2             2
     5. First time derivative of reduced coordinates update
                                        yPnC1 D yPnC 1 C t
                                                         2 yRnC1
                                                       2



Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                       DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
644                                           C. FARHAT ET AL.


   The temporal discretization of problem (48) by the generalized-˛ method, which for ˛m D ˛f D
ˇ D 0 and  D 1=2 becomes the explicit central difference method, is summarized in Table XII.
Its application to the solution of problem (48) is summarized in Table XIII for the explicit case. The
same comments made in Section 4.1 about the computational complexity of the implicit and explicit
time discretizations of problem P1R apply also in this case.

4.3. Summary
In summary, for FE models with constant mass matrices, the ROM P1R can be considered for both
implicit and explicit time discretizations. For FE models with configuration-dependent mass matri-
ces, only the ROM P2Rb should be considered for explicit time discretization, whereas both ROMs
P2Ra and P2Rb can be considered for implicit time discretizations. Because of space limitations,
however, only ROM P2Ra is considered in what follows for implicit time discretizations of FE
models with configuration-dependent mass matrices.

           5. HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR REDUCED-ORDER MODELS

There is a limited number of problem scenarios where the nonlinear structural dynamics ROMs
introduced in Section 4 can deliver a noticeable speed-up ‘as is’. These include the following:
   The case where k  N , time integration is performed by an implicit scheme, and the sparsity
    pattern of the dynamic tangent stiffness matrix is such that the computational cost of the linear
    solves performed at each Newton iteration of each time-step dominates the total computational
    cost.
   The case where time integration is performed by an explicit scheme and the stability time-step
    for the nonlinear ROM is significantly larger – say, an order of magnitude or more – than that of
    its counterpart HDM. This is usually expected because, in this case, a projection-based ROM
    is supposed to filter out the dependence of the stability time-step on the high mesh frequencies
    of the associated HDM (for example, see [38]).
However, as already noted in Section 1, to deliver a significant speed-up, an explicit or implicit
nonlinear ROM should be equipped with a second-tier level of approximation known as a hyper
reduction procedure, which effectively removes the dependence of its computational complexity
on the size N of the underlying HDM. To this effect, a physics-based, energy-conserving hyper
reduction method, which furthermore is natural for FE computations, is described in this section
in three parts and labeled as ECSW. The first part focuses on the online hyper reduction of force
vectors; therefore, it is applicable to the time integration by an explicit scheme of the nonlinear
ROMs of the form P1R (see Table IX) and, for example, P2Rb (see Table XIII). It is also applicable
to the approximation of the right-hand sides of the linearized systems of equations generated by the
Newton iterations associated with the time integration by an implicit scheme of a given nonlinear
ROM (for example, see Table VIII or XI). The second part focuses on the online hyper reduction
of tangent matrices and therefore is relevant to the time integration by an implicit scheme of the
nonlinear ROMs of the form P1R and, for example, P2Ra. The third and last part focuses on some
details about the offline component of the proposed hyper reduction method.

5.1. Energy-conserving hyper reduction of force vectors
Using the notation introduced in (40), all three nonlinear semi-discrete ROMs P1R, P2Ra, and P2Rb
can be re-written in the following unified form

                                   frı .y;
                                        R t / C fr .y; y; R „; t / D 0
                                                        P y;                                           (50)

by separating the reduced vectors of forces into those whose online evaluation is affordable and
denoting them by frı , and those whose online evaluation is not affordable and denoting them by fr .
Here, ‘affordable’ describes a computational complexity that scales with k or, at least, that does not
grow with N .

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                         Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                            10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                          645

   Assuming without any loss of generality that the vector of external forces in the HDM P1
originates from a small number nl of load sets and can be written in tensor product form as
                                                          nl
                                                          X
                                           f ext .t / D           i .t /fi
                                                                             con

                                                          i D1
         con       N
where fi       2 R and i 2 R describe the spatial and temporal components of the i th load set,
respectively, and noting that although the computational complexity of the matrix–vector product
V T ficon scales with N , this product can be pre-computed offline because ficon is a prescribed
vector, it follows that in the ROM P1R,
                                                           nl
                                                           X
                                   frı .y;
                                        R t / D yR                i .t /V
                                                                             T
                                                                                 ficon                              (51)
                                                           i D1

and
                                      fr .y; „/ D V T f i nt .Vy; „/
  Assuming also without any loss of generality that the vector of external forces fNext in model
P2Ra can be written as
                                                                     nl
                                                                     X
                               fNext .q; t / D fNf ol .q; t / C                  i .t /fi
                                                                                            con

                                                                     i D1

where fNf ol 2 RN is the configuration-dependent vector of all external forces (for example, fol-
lower forces) that cannot be expressed in space-time tensor product form, it follows that in the
ROM P2Ra, the reduced vector of forces whose computational complexity scales independently of
N takes the same form as that for model P1R (51), and that whose computational complexity scales
with N includes, in addition to the reduced vector of internal forces, some contributions from the
reduced vector of inertial and external forces – that is,
                                                                                                    
fr .y; y; R „; t / D V T MN .Vy/V I yCV
        P y;                              R    T N
                                                 C .Vy; V y/
                                                          P V yCV
                                                              P    T
                                                                       fNi nt .Vy; „/  fNf ol .Vy; t /

Following a similar reasoning for the ROM P2Rb leads in this case to
                                                                                           
                                             P V yP C V T fNNi nt .Vy; „/  fNNf ol .Vy; t /
                   P „; t / D V T CNN .Vy; V y/
           fr .y; y;

   Hence, the first idea behind the hyper reduction approximation described herein is to perform an
affordable approximation of the term fr but account for the term frı as is. To this effect, it is first
reminded that in a FE model, fr originates at the element level in both cases and therefore can be
written as
                                                  ne
                                                  X
                        fr .y; y;
                                P y;
                                   R „; t / D           VeT fe .Ve y; Ve y;   R „e ; t /
                                                                          P Ve y;                                   (52)
                                                  eD1

where Ve 2 RNe k is the restriction of the matrix V to the rows indexed by the global DOFs
identity numbers associated with element e, ne denotes the number of elements in the FE model, Ne
denotes the number of DOFs associated with element e, „e denotes the vector of internal variables
associated with element e, and fe 2 RNe denotes the vector of elemental (or element level) forces
originating from element e.
   The second idea behind the hyper reduction method described herein results from the observation
that each column of V represents a virtual displacement of the structure or solid body of interest, and
therefore, each corresponding row of fr .y; y;     R „; t / (52) represents the virtual work performed
                                                 P y;
by the forces f  .Vy; V y;    R „; t / along this virtual displacement. It follows that approximating
                          P V y;
the vector function fr .y; y; R „; t / can be interpreted as approximating a set of energies associated
                            P y;
with some specific instances of the forces f of the HDM that are specified in Section 5.3. Hence, the
essence of the second idea behind the hyper reduction method proposed herein is to identify a small

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                        DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
646                                            C. FARHAT ET AL.


subset of the ne elements of the FE model and equip it with a corresponding set of ne weighting
coefficients e so that the natural FE approximation
                                                        X
           fr .y; y; R „; t /  fQr .y; y;
                   P y;                      R „; t / D
                                          P y;            ? T 
                                                          e Ve fe .Ve y; Ve y;   R „e ; t /
                                                                            P Ve y;         (53)
                                                         EQ

preserves the work performed by the forces of the HDM along some set of input generalized dis-
placements belonging to the space spanned by the ROB chosen for approximating the solution of
the problem of interest. (For this reason, the hyper reduction method presented herein is labeled as
the ECSW method.) In Equation (53), the subset of element indices over which the summation is
performed, EQ – which is also referred to herein as the reduced mesh – is defined as
                                       ®                              ¯
                                 EQ D e 2 ¹1; 2; : : : ; ne º W e? ¤ 0

and e? is the non-negative weighting coefficient of element e to be determined.
   Let ? denote the vector of all element weights e? . From the definition of these coefficients
given earlier and highlighted in (53), it follows that ? is the solution of the following constrained
optimization problem
                                           ?
                                               D arg min jj jj0                                         (54)
                                                     2ˆ

where jj  jj0 denotes the so-called zero norm and ˆ denotes the feasible set of candidate solutions.
The zero norm counts the number of non-zero components in the vector to which it is applied, and
ˆ is defined as

                            ˆ D ¹ 2 Rne W jjG  bjj2 6 jjbjj2 ;           > 0º                          (55)

where the matrix G and vector b store the un-assembled elemental contributions to the reduced vec-
tor of forces to be approximated and the (assembled) reduced vector of forces to be approximated,
respectively. G and b are arranged in a particular way that will be described precisely in Section 5.3,
and 2 Œ0; 1 is a user-defined tolerance for controlling the accuracy of the approximation. Note that
problem (54) is defined so that D 0 yields the solution e? D 18e 2 ¹1; 2; : : : ; ne º, and therefore,
the approximation (53) is consistent in the sense defined in [25] and recalled in Section 3.3 of this
paper. On the other hand, a tolerance chosen to lie in a recommended range, say Œ0:01; 0:1, can be
                                                Q  ne where j  j denotes the set cardinality. Because
expected to yield a sparse solution, that is, jEj
problem (54) can be solved offline (see Section 5.3), it follows that the computational complexity of
the approximation (53) scales with jEj   Q  N . Therefore, this approximation of the reduced vector
of forces of interest is affordable in the sense defined earlier.
   At this point, it is noted that unlike most other function sampling methods developed for hyper
reduction such as EIM, its variants, and their discrete analogs, ECSW does not approximate the
vector function of interest – here, a vector of forces – directly. Instead, it approximates energy-
like quantities produced by this vector function. Therefore, by controlling the relative accuracy
of the approximation using the ratio jjfQr  fr jj2 =jjfr jj2 , ECSW controls the numerical energy
associated with this approximation and, therefore, its numerical stability. In this sense, the approach
used to transfer the reduced forces from the mesh associated with the HDM to the reduced mesh
and the corresponding notion of accuracy are similar to those used in [39] to transfer aerodynamic
forces across non-matching discrete fluid and structural interfaces in fluid-structure applications. A
mathematical proof of the numerical stability of this approach and an illustration of its impact in
practice will be published elsewhere.

5.2. Energy conserving hyper reduction of tangent matrices
Using the compact notation introduced in (39), substituting in each nonlinear semi-discrete ROM
developed in Section 4 the reduced vector of forces by its hyper reduced approximation, and inte-
grating the resulting set of ordinary differential equations by the implicit generalized-˛ method lead

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                          Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                  10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                647

to the solution at each Newton iteration of each time-step of a linearized system of equations of
the form
                      ı          
                                                                                     
                                      j                               j
                 Krdy n C KQ rdy n ynC1˛    f
                                               ; „n    y D f r
                                                                ı
                                                                    y
                                                                    R nC1˛m ; t nC1˛ f
                                                                                           (56)
                                      Q    j          j        j
                                    fr ynC1˛f ; yPnC1˛f ; yRnC1˛m ; „n ; tnC1˛f
where
                                             ı           1  ˛m
                                       Krdyn D                       I
                                                      ˇ.1  ˛f /t 2
and
                         
                                        X                              
                             j              ? T dyn         j
                 KQ rdy n ynC1˛ f
                                   ; „n  D  e V e Ke   V e ynC1˛ f
                                                                    ; „ne   Ve                            (57)
                                                 EQ

Equation (57) reveals that in this case, only the elements in the reduced mesh EQ contribute to
                                                                  
the construction of the dynamic tangent stiffness matrix KQ rdyn . Thus, this construction constitutes
an affordable computation whose computational complexity scales only with jEj.      Q This desirable
feature follows from the hyper reduction approximation of the reduced force vector discussed in
Section 5.1. It is also noteworthy that no further approximation is needed to obtain (57). Therefore,
the asymptotically quadratic convergence of Newton’s method applied to the solution of the reduced
set of governing nonlinear discrete equations is not compromised.
                                          
   For the ROM P1R, the matrix Kedy n is simply Ke – that is, the elemental contribution to the
static tangent stiffness matrix K – whereas for the ROM P2Ra,
                   
                                                                          1  ˛m
                          j                  N edyn Ve y j
            Kedy n Ve ynC1˛      ; „ne   D K           nC1˛   ; „ ne                   I
                                f                             f
                                                                           ˇ.1  ˛f /t 2
where KN edy n is the elemental contribution to the previously defined transformed dynamic tangent
stiffness matrix KN dy n .
Remark 2
The significance of the non-negativity constraint > 0 in (55) may be inferred from the role of the
                                                                                                   
weights e? in (57). Specifically, this constraint preserves the positive semi-definiteness of Krdyn
and, therefore, the positive definiteness of the complete reduced dynamic tangent stiffness matrix.
Hence, it contributes to the preservation of numerical stability.

5.3. Sparse non-negative least-squares problem
To complete the formulation of the optimization problem (54) whose solution characterizes the pro-
posed hyper reduction approximation, it remains to define the matrix G and the vector b used in the
first of the two constraints identifying the feasible set (55). Each row-wise block of G and b is the
un-assembled and assembled elemental contributions, respectively, of the vector of reduced forces
to be approximated, evaluated at one particular training configuration. The training configurations
are obtained by first retrieving all collected solution snapshots (from one or multiple simulations)
or a subset of these, projecting them onto the ROB V , and evaluating the nonlinear entities to
be approximated at the resulting reduced-order states. More specifically, the solution snapshots
collected here are as follows:
   For the ROM P1R, they are the displacement vectors u.i / . Here and throughout the remain-
    der of this paper, the superscript .i/ designates the i th training configuration. For example,
    u.i / D u.t .i / I %.i / / where t .i / is the time at which the solution snapshot u.i / was collected and
    %.i / denotes the values of the model parameter set used for the simulation that generated this
    solution snapshot. In this case, the vector of reduced coordinates associated with the i th training
    configuration can be computed using at least two different approaches such as
                                                               1 T .i /
                                                 y .i / D V T V    V u                                    (58)

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                            Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                              DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                         10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
648                                                 C. FARHAT ET AL.


      or
                                                    y .i / D V T M u.i /                                         (59)
    In the first case, Vy .i / is the orthogonal projection of u.i / onto the subspace spanned by the
    columns of V . In the second case, Vy .i / is an oblique projection of u.i / onto the same subspace.
    In this work, the orthogonal projection (58) is chosen for the following reason. Whereas the
    orthonormality condition (35) has several virtues in structural dynamics, it is motivated here
    primarily by the desire to keep the resulting ROM P1R (36) as simple as possible. On the other
    hand, the orthogonal projection underlying (58) is motivated by the desire to minimize the
    error u.i /  Vy .i / in the two-norm jj  jj2 , as this norm is often chosen in practice to evaluate
    the performance of such a ROM. In any case, several numerical experiments performed by
    the authors have shown that in practice, both approaches for computing the vector of reduced
    coordinates y .i / lead to ROM results with comparable accuracy.
   For the ROM P2Ra, the solution snapshots are the generalized displacements q .i / , generalized
    velocities qP .i / , and generalized accelerations qR .i / , defined as
                            .i /
                   .i /       u
                q D
                             ‰I.i /
                            .i /      "                 #
                              uP         I       0
                   .i /
                qP D P .i / D                       1 v .i /
                             ‰I          0 T ‰I.i /
                            .i /      "                 #             "                        #         !
                              uR         I       0                       0  0                
                   .i /
                qR D R .i / D                       1          .i
                                                                 a  /
                                                                                                  qP .i /
                             ‰I          0 T ‰I.i /                      0 TP ‰I.i / ; ‰
                                                                                       P .i /
                                                                                         I

      In this case, the vectors of reduced coordinates, velocities, and accelerations associated with
      the i th training configuration are computed as
                       1 T .i /                 1 T .i /                     1 T .i /
        y .i / D V T V      V q ; yP .i / D V T V      V qP ; and yR .i / D V T V        V qR    (60)

    respectively, so that Vy .i / , V yP .i / , and V yR .i / are the orthogonal projections of q .i / , qP .i / , and
    qR .i / , respectively, onto the subspace spanned by the columns of V . Again, the reasoning behind
    this choice is similar to that explained earlier for the case of the ROM P1R.
   For the ROM P2Rb, the solution snapshots are the generalized displacements q .i / and
    generalized velocities qP .i / . In this case, the vectors of reduced coordinates and reduced
    velocities associated with the i th training configuration have the same expressions as in (60).
  After the quantities given in (58) and (60) are computed, the elemental contributions to the matrix
G and vector b are constructed for each training configuration i 2 ¹1; 2; : : : ; nt º as follows:
                                                                                      
                       Gi e D VeT fe Ve y .i / ; Ve yP .i / ; Ve yR .i / ; „.i
                                                                             e
                                                                                / .i /
                                                                                 ; t
                                                                                     Xne
                            bi D fr Vy .i / ; V yP .i / ; V yR .i / ; „.i / ; t .i / D    Gi e
                                                                                     eD1

where „.i / is the vector of internal variables associated with the i th training configuration and
nt denotes the total number of considered training configurations. Then, the assembling of these
elemental contributions in block-matrix form as follows
                       2                 3                       2       3
                          G11    G1ne                            b1
                       6             :: 7 2 Rk nt ne ;          6       7
                 G D 4 ::: : : :      : 5                   b D 4 ::: 5 2 Rk nt
                             Gnt 1    Gnt ne                                     bnt
completes the construction of the matrix G and vector b, and the definition of the optimization
problem (54). Hence, the remainder of this section focuses on the description of one candidate
                                                                                     Q
algorithm for solving this optimization problem in order to determine a reduced mesh E.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                   Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                     DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                              649

   Unfortunately, introducing the zero norm in the definition of an objective function associated
with a constrained optimization problem typically makes the problem NP-hard [40] and therefore
calls for an exhaustive combinatoric search to locate a truly optimal point. For this reason, a sub-
optimal but affordable algorithm for solving problem (54) is often accepted. In practice, all what is
needed is a feasible algorithm for extracting from a given mesh a reduced set of elements that is suf-
ficiently small to deliver the desired speed-up, and determining a set of weights for these elements
that enables the hyper reduction approximation (53) to be sufficiently accurate. For this purpose,
the feasible algorithm chosen in this work is a variant of the well-known active-set algorithm of
Lawson and Hanson [41] for solving a non-negative least squares (NNLS) problem. This variant –
also known as sparse NNLS – solves the standard NNLS problem (61) inexactly, in the sense that it
terminates prematurely when either some measure of the error drops below a pre-defined threshold
or the number of elements in the active set reaches a prescribed target value [42]. Here, the adjective
‘sparse’ does not refer to the matrix G, which is actually dense, but to the desired characteris-
tic of the sought-after solution that is promoted by the algorithm. The standard NNLS problem is
defined as
                                           
                                               D arg min jjG  bjj22                                    (61)
                                                     2‡

where the feasible set ‡ is defined by
                                           ‡ D ¹ 2 Rne W      > 0º                                      (62)
   For completeness, the sparse NNLS algorithm equipped with a threshold-based termination cri-
terion is described here by Algorithm 1, where EQ and GEQ denote the restriction of the vector and
                                                             Q respectively. This algorithm locates
column-wise restriction of the matrix G to the active subset E,
a feasible point 2 ˆ that is in principle a suboptimal solution of problem (54), but one which in
                                                       Q
practice is found to deliver an effective reduced mesh E.

Algorithm 1 Sparse Non-Negative Least Squares Algorithm
 1: EQ    ;
 2: Z     ¹1; 2; : : : ; ne º
 3:      0
 4: while jjG  bjj2 > jjbjj2 do
 5:           G T .b  G /
 6:    EQ      EQ [ ¹max_value_index. /º
 7:    Z       ¹1; 2; : : : ; ne º n EQ
 8:    loop
 9:          EQ      arg min2RjEj    Q jjGE
                                           Q   bjj2
10:          Z       0
11:         if EQ > 0 then
12:
13:           break
14:       end if
15:               C max_feasible_step . ;          /.  /
16:       Z      ¹zero_value_indices. /º
17:       EQ    ¹1; 2; : : : ; ne º n Z
18:    end loop
19: end while



                                               6. APPLICATIONS

The nonlinear model reduction framework presented in the previous sections of this paper was
implemented by the authors in an enhanced version of the general purpose FE code AERO-S

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                          Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                      10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
650                                            C. FARHAT ET AL.


[43, 44]. Here, the efficacy of this computational framework is demonstrated by a number of non-
linear numerical simulations. More specifically, the goals are to assess its accuracy and demonstrate
its versatility and potential for significant CPU time reduction. To this effect, this framework is first
applied to the solution of a set of academic but nevertheless challenging nonlinear dynamic response
problems taken from the literature. This set of problems is characterized by relatively small-sized
HDMs (with more or less 104 DOFs) and very small ROM counterparts (with about 10 DOFs).
Then, the proposed nonlinear model reduction framework is applied to the fast simulation of an
underbody blast problem – which is the motivating problem for this work – to assess its perfor-
mance for large-scale realistic problems. In this case, the considered HDM has on the order of 106
DOFs and the corresponding ROM on the order of 100 DOFs. All ROBs are constructed using the
POD method based on solution snapshots. All ROMs are applied to the same configuration (model
parameter set values) for which they have been trained: A comprehensive cross-validation method
for applications to variable parametric configurations is the subject of a companion paper.
   Furthermore, the following terminology is borrowed from [25] and adopted here:
   ‘Model I’: denotes the HDM of interest.
   ‘Model II’: denotes a counterpart ROM (for example, ROM P1R, P2Ra, or P2Rb) without
    hyper reduction.
   ‘Model III’: denotes a counterpart ROM equipped with the ECSW approximation described in
    Section 5 – that is, a counterpart Model II equipped with the ECSW approximation.
  All global relative errors reported in this section are defined as follows:
                               rP
                                     .u˘ .t /  uQ ˘ .t //T .u˘ .t /  uQ ˘ .t //
                                   t 2P
                      RE˘ D                rP                                      100%
                                                     u˘ .t /T u˘ .t /
                                              t 2P

where the ˘ subscript designates the x; y (not to be confused with the vector of reduced coordi-
nates), or ´ direction of a global reference frame, u˘ .t / 2 Rnp is the vector of ˘-displacements at
time t extracted from the solution based on the HDM of interest, uQ ˘ .t / 2 Rnp is the vector of ˘-
displacements at time t extracted from the solution based on the constructed ROM, and P is the set
of time stamps used in the evaluation of the relative error – that is,
                           P D ¹t 2 ¹t0 ; t0 C s; t0 C 2s; : : :º W t 6 tmax º
where s is the sampling time-interval chosen for the evaluation of the global relative error and
tmax is the maximum simulated time. The global relative errors associated with each component
of the velocity, total rotation vector, and convected angular velocity are similarly defined. Here, it
is emphasized that monitoring the global relative error per type of DOF and direction is essential
to avoid masking large relative errors in small-valued quantities by relative errors in larger-valued
quantities.
   Finally, it is noted that all computations reported herein are performed on a Linux cluster with
dual 8-core 2.6 GHz Intel Sandy Bridge processors, 64 GB of memory per blade, and an FDR
InfiniBand interconnect. Mesh partitioning for parallel processing of HDM and ROM computations
is performed in certain cases using an enhanced version of the greedy algorithm [45, 46]. To simplify
discussions, all CPU timings are reported for the computation of the HDM and ROM solutions u (or
q) and y, respectively; in particular, these do not include any contribution from post-processing.

6.1. Fast spinning top in a gravitational field
First, the performance (accuracy and CPU time) of the proposed nonlinear model reduction frame-
work is assessed for model P1 with only geometric nonlinearities. The model problem chosen here
is that describing the fast spinning of an aluminium top in a gravitational field and discussed in [47].
The shape of the top is a cone with height H D 0:1 m and radius R D 0:05 m. It is simply sup-
ported at its apex (see Figure 1). Its material response is characterized by the St. Venant–Kirchhoff
hyperelastic constitutive law, with Young’s modulus E D 80 GPa and Poisson’s ratio  D 0:33.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                   10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                  651




Figure 1. Fast spinning top in a gravitational field: finite element mesh, boundary conditions, and probe
                                                 locations.




Figure 2. Fast spinning top in a gravitational field: sequence of deformed configurations at t D 0 s, t D 0:8 s,
                                                  and t D 1:6 s.

         Table XIV. Fast spinning top in a gravitational field: performance appraisal (single core).

           (a) CPU timings and speed-up factors                     (b) Global relative errors
                   CPU timing (s)    Speed-up factor                       Model II (%)     Model III (%)

      Model I        1.90105           1.0             x-displacement         0.32              2.10
      Model II       1.73105           1.10            y-displacement         0.24              1.70
      Model III      6.52101           2.92103        ´-displacement         0.38              2.60

                                                           x-velocity          1.07              7.05
                                                           y-velocity          0.88              6.27
                                                           ´-velocity          0.99              6.79


The density in the reference configuration is 0 D 2700 kg/m3 . The external force is generated by a
gravitational acceleration g D 9:81 m/s2 acting in the negative ´ direction.
   A FE HDM is constructed for this problem with ne D 4461 10-noded tetrahedral elements with
displacement-only DOFs, and a total number of N D 13; 317 DOFs. Initially, the top is set into the
position obtained by a rigid body rotation of 3 rad about the x-axis, and the spinning motion about
its axis characterized by the (convected) angular velocity ´ D 300 rad/s. Temporal discretization
is performed using the implicit generalized-˛ method with ˇ D 0:444,  D 0:833, ˛f D 0:333, and
˛m D 0, and a constant time-step t D 2  104 s. The HDM-based simulation is performed on
a single core of the Linux cluster and terminated at time tmax D 2 s. A sequence of configurations
illustrating the motion of the top over the course of this simulation is presented in Figure 2.
   Next, a nonlinear ROM of dimension k D 9 is constructed. For the FE model described earlier,
the sparse NNLS algorithm equipped with D 0:01 produces a reduced mesh with one element only
            Q D 1. Using the aforementioned ROM with and without the ECSW approximation and
– that is, jEj
the same time-step t D 2  104 s as for the HDM computation, two additional simulations are
performed on a single core of the Linux cluster. The obtained performance results are summarized

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                            Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                              DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
652                                                                          C. FARHAT ET AL.



                                 0.1
                                                                 Model I                                                                                       Model I

 node 608 x-displacement (m)




                                                                                    node 608 z-displacement (m)
                               0.08                             Model II                                                                                      Model II
                                                                Model III                                                                                     Model III
                               0.06                                                                                  -0.05
                               0.04
                               0.02                                                                                 -0.055
                                      0
                               -0.02
                                                                                                                     -0.06
                               -0.04
                               -0.06
                                                                                                                    -0.065
                               -0.08
                                -0.1
                                          0   0.5       1         1.5           2                                              0          0.5         1          1.5       2
                                                     time (s)                                                                                      time (s)
                               0.15                                                                                  0.02
                                                                 Model I                                                                                        Model I
 node 99 x-displacement (m)




                                                                                    node 99 z-displacement (m)
                                                                Model II                                                                                       Model II
                                 0.1                            Model III                                                  0                                   Model III

                                                                                                                     -0.02
                               0.05
                                                                                                                     -0.04
                                      0
                                                                                                                     -0.06
                               -0.05
                                                                                                                     -0.08
                                -0.1                                                                                  -0.1

                               -0.15                                                                                 -0.12
                                          0   0.5       1         1.5           2                                              0          0.5         1          1.5       2
                                                     time (s)                                                                                      time (s)

                               Figure 3. Fast spinning top in a gravitational field: sample computed displacements at two probes.


                                                                                                                    0.4
                               0.8                               Model I                                                                                       Model I
                                                                Model II                                                                                      Model II
 node 608 y-velocity (m/s)




                                                                                        node 608 z-velocity (m/s)




                                                                Model III                                           0.3                                       Model III
                               0.6

                               0.4                                                                                  0.2

                               0.2                                                                                  0.1

                                 0                                                                                    0
                               -0.2                                                                                 -0.1
                               -0.4
                                                                                                                    -0.2
                               -0.6
                                                                                                                    -0.3
                                      0       0.5      1          1.5           2                                          0             0.5         1          1.5        2
                                                    time (s)                                                                                      time (s)
                                20                                                                                   20
                                                                  Model I                                                                                       Model I
                                                                 Model II                                                                                      Model II
                                15                                                                                   15
                                                                                        node 99 z-velocity (m/s)




                                                                 Model III                                                                                     Model III
 node 99 y-velocity (m/s)




                                10
                                                                                                                     10
                                 5
                                                                                                                      5
                                 0
                                                                                                                      0
                                -5
                                                                                                                     -5
                               -10

                               -15                                                                                  -10

                               -20                                                                                  -15
                                      0       0.5      1          1.5           2                                          0             0.5         1          1.5        2
                                                    time (s)                                                                                      time (s)

                                 Figure 4. Fast spinning top in a gravitational field: sample computed velocities at two probes.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                                                           Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                                                                             DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                            653

in Table XIV, which reports the measured speed-ups and global relative errors computed using
a sampling time-interval s D 2  104 s, and Figures 3 and 4, which display two samples at
two probe locations each of the computed displacement and velocity time histories. The reader can
observe that Model II reproduces the results of Model I with an impressive accuracy but, as expected,
does not deliver the sought-after speed-up. On the other hand, Model III delivers numerical results
with global relative errors ranging between 1.70% and 7.05% but 2:92  103 times faster than
Model I.

6.2. Dynamic impact of a circular bar
Next, the performance of the proposed nonlinear model reduction framework is assessed for an
instance of model P1 featuring an elasto-plastic material and large plastic strains and, therefore,
both material and geometric nonlinearities. Specifically, the dynamic impact problem of a three-
dimensional copper bar on a rigid frictionless wall is considered here. This problem has been
previously studied both experimentally [48] and numerically [49].
   The bar has a length L D 32:4 mm and a circular cross-section with radius R0 D 3:2 mm (see
Figure 5). Its material response is characterized by a model of J2 flow theory using a logarithmic
free energy function, the von Mises yield criterion, Young’s modulus E D 117 GPa, Poisson’s ratio
 D 0:33, the yield stress Y D 0:4 GPa, and the isotropic hardening modulus H D 0:1 GPa. The
density in the reference configuration is set to 0 D 8930 kg/m3 . Because of the symmetry of the
geometry, only one quarter of the bar is modeled using ne D 1728 20-noded hexahedral elements
with displacement-only DOFs. The resulting HDM has N D 23; 272 DOFs. The initial velocity of
the bar is set to v0 D 227 m/s, and the temporal discretization is performed using the explicit central
difference method.
   For this problem, a nonlinear ROM of dimension k D 9 is constructed. For the FE model
described earlier, the sparse NNLS algorithm configured with D 0:01 delivers a reduced mesh EQ
with 69 elements .jEj Q D 69/.
   Whether based on the aforementioned HDM or its ROM counterpart outlined earlier, all numerical
simulations of this problem are started at the point of impact without initial deformation, continued
subject to the constraint that once some nodal points are in contact with the wall they remain in
contact at all subsequent times, and terminated at the time tmax D 8  105 s. Two configurations
illustrating the deformation of the bar over the course of the HDM simulation are given in Figure 6.




       Figure 5. Dynamic impact of a circular bar: mesh, boundary conditions, and probe locations.




Figure 6. Dynamic impact of a circular bar: sequence of deformed configurations at t D 40 s and t D
                                                80 s.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                   10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
654                                               C. FARHAT ET AL.


             Table XV. Dynamic impact of a circular bar: performance assessment (16 cores).

           (a) CPU timings and speed-up factors                      (b) Global relative errors
                   CPU timing (s)    Speed-up factor                       Model II (%)      Model III (%)

      Model I        9.45103          1.0              x-displacement          0.28              0.26
      Model II       7.95101          1.18102         y-displacement          0.52              0.55
      Model III      4.95              1.91103         ´-displacement          0.52              0.55

                                                          x-velocity            2.17              2.16
                                                          y-velocity            9.80              9.78
                                                          ´-velocity            9.80              9.78


   More specifically, both HDM and ROM simulations are performed in this case twice, using two
different time-stepping strategies:
   A variable time-step based on the estimation of the critical stability time-step at regular inter-
    vals. All CPU timings and speed-up factors reported later in the text are computed for this
    time-stepping strategy as it is the fairest one. For Model I, it is found that the critical stability
    time-step is tIcr 2 Œ1:12109 ; 1:43108  s. For Model II, it is observed that tII cr
                                                                                               2 Œ1:98
                                                                 cr
    10 ; 2:41  10  s, and for Model III, it is found that tIII 2 Œ1:67  10 ; 2:39  107  s.
       7            7                                                             7

   A fixed time-step strategy with tI D tII D tIII D 1:12  109 s designed to facilitate
    the assessment of the accuracy of the constructed nonlinear ROM. All global errors and probe
    displacement/velocity time histories reported later are computed using this time-step and the
    sampling time-interval s D 1:12  108 s.
   Table XV summarizes the CPU performances obtained using in all cases 16 cores of the Linux
cluster. For this problem, Model II delivers a speed-up factor equal to 118. However, from the
comparison of the ranges of tIcr and tII     cr
                                                  given earlier, it follows that most of this speed-up is
due to the larger time-step that Model II can afford (see also the second bullet at the beginning of
Section 5). On the other hand, Model III delivers a speed-up factor of the order of 2000. Again,
from the comparison of the ranges of tIcr and tIII    cr
                                                             given earlier, it follows that this speed-up
factor is partially due to the larger time-step afforded by Model III (roughly a factor of 100) and
partially due to the problem size reduction (roughly a factor of 20). The reader can also observe
that for this problem, Model III delivers almost the same accuracy as Model II, thereby implying an
excellent performance of the hyper reduction method ECSW. Using either of these two ROMs, the
displacement and velocity fields computed using the HDM are reproduced with less than 1% and
10% global relative errors, respectively.
   Figure 7 graphically displays samples of the computed displacement and velocity time histories
at two probe locations. Again, this figure shows that for this problem, both Model II and Model III
reproduce the results of Model I with the same good level of accuracy. A notable exception is the
peak ´-velocity at node 2336. Close examination reveals that the initial value of this velocity com-
ponent at the aforementioned node is not accurately represented by the chosen ROB. Therefore, it
is likely that the failure of the constructed ROM to capture the peak value is a direct consequence of
the inaccurate representation of the chosen initial condition. Typically, such an error can be reduced
by using a higher-dimensional ROB. However, it is noted here that this local error does not sig-
nificantly impact the overall accuracy of the simulation, and therefore, the merit of increasing the
dimension of the chosen ROB is questionable (at least in this case).

6.3. Underbody blast of a V-hull vehicle
The motivating application of this work is the fast numerical simulation of underbody blast events.
Therefore, this section focuses on a representative example of such problems. It centers around a
generic V-hull vehicle made predominantly of steel and subjected to live fire blast tests [50]. It fea-
tures large rotations, large strains, and large angular velocities. The constitutive relation adopted here
for steel is a nonlinear elasto-plastic one. The external force is a time-dependent and configuration-

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                             Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                               DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                                                                                             10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                  NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                                                               655

                                                                                                                             300000
                                    4                                                                                                                                  Model I



  node 2360 y-displacement (mm)
                                                                                                                                                                      Model II




                                                                                               node 2336 z-velocity (mm/s)
                                   3.5                                                                                       250000                                   Model III

                                    3                                                                                        200000

                                   2.5                                                                                       150000
                                    2
                                                                                                                             100000
                                   1.5
                                                                                                                              50000
                                    1
                                                                           Model I                                               0
                                   0.5                                    Model II
                                                                          Model III
                                    0                                                                                        -50000
                                         0   1e-05 2e-05 3e-05 4e-05 5e-05 6e-05 7e-05 8e-05                                          0    1e-05 2e-05 3e-05 4e-05 5e-05 6e-05 7e-05 8e-05
                                                              time (s)                                                                                     time (s)

Figure 7. Dynamic impact of a circular bar: sample computed displacements and velocities at two probes.




                                                   Figure 8. Underbody blast of a V-hull vehicle: mesh and probe location.




Figure 9. Underbody blast of a V-hull vehicle: deformed configurations at t D 0:5 ms and t D 1:5 ms (views
                                        are from inside the vehicle).


dependent pressure force due to the explosion of a 10-kg charge and gravity. The blast pressure
loading is represented by the CONWEP blast model. Hence, all sources of nonlinearity described in
Section 2 are present in this example problem, which therefore is described by the model P2.
   A FE model of the considered V-hull vehicle is constructed using ne D 236; 995 flexible shell and
rigid beam elements with six DOFs per node (see Figure 8). This HDM has N D 1; 399; 056 DOFs.
   The V-hull vehicle is assumed to be initially at rest, two implicit and explicit time discretizations
are considered, and two corresponding nonlinear ROMs of dimension k D 100 are constructed and
used with and without hyper reduction. More specifically,
            The implicit time discretization is performed using the generalized-˛ method with ˇ D 0:444,
              D 0:833, ˛f D 0:333, ˛m D 0, and a constant time-step t D 1  105 s. In this case,
             the sparse NNLS algorithm configured with D 0:01 extracts from the aforementioned FE
             model a reduced mesh EQ with 3145 elements .jEj     Q D 3145/. Whether using the HDM or
             nonlinear ROM with or without hyper reduction, the structural response is computed until
             tmax D 1  102 s using the same fixed time-step t D 1  105 s and a single core of

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                                                                  Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                                                                                    DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                             10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
656                                                  C. FARHAT ET AL.


                  Table XVI. Underbody blast of a V-hull vehicle: performance appraisal.
                                         (a) CPU timings and speed-up factors

                                   Implicit time discretization                        Explicit time discretization
                             CPU timing (s)             Speed-up factor           CPU timing (s)           Speed-up factor
                               (1 core)                    (1 core)                (128 cores)               (128 cores)

 Model I                       5:02  105                 1.0                      1:14  105                1.0
 Model II                      3:63  105                 1.38                     5:44  102                2.10102
 Model III . D 0:01/          3:57  103                 1:41  102               4.95                      2:30  104
 Model III . D 0:1/           7:16  102                 7:01  102               1.80                      6:33  104
                                                (b) Global relative errors

                                   Implicit time discretization                        Explicit time discretization
                        Model II (%) Model III (%) Model III (%) Model II (%) Model III (%) Model III (%)
                                     . D 0:01/     . D 0:1/    . D 0:01/ . D 0:1/
 x-displacement             3.05              3.53           32.48              0.06            0.20              3.14
 y-displacement             2.46              2.72           19.27              0.01            0.02              1.19
 ´-displacement             3.52              3.69           11.10              0.01            0.02              1.01
 x-rotation                 1.53              1.87           18.07              0.06            0.05              1.36
 y-rotation                 1.63              2.04           19.76              0.08            0.07              1.47
 ´-rotation                 2.40              2.95           25.22              0.14            0.13              2.01

 x-velocity                12.05            13.62            49.91              1.51            1.85             11.68
 y-velocity                 7.21             8.38            39.05              0.86            1.01              5.78
 ´-velocity                 4.81             5.70            27.58              0.38            0.44              3.74

 x-angular velocity        23.03            24.89            58.49              8.78            9.35             15.95
 y-angular velocity        24.60            26.63            63.41              9.69            9.96             18.22
 ´-angular velocity        29.92            32.40            73.88             15.23           16.41             29.20


    the Linux cluster, and all global relative errors are calculated using the sampling time-interval
    s D 1  105 s.
   The explicit time discretization is obtained using the central difference method. In this case,
    the sparse NNLS algorithm configured with D 0:01 extracts from the aforementioned FE
    model a reduced mesh EQ with 3058 elements (jEj    Q D 3058). All HDM and ROM computations
    are performed on 128 cores of the Linux cluster until tmax D 1  103 s. To compute the
    speed-up factor – defined here as the ratio of the CPU time obtained for a given simulation
    using the HDM of interest and that obtained for the same simulation using its counterpart
    ROM on the same number of cores – in a fair manner, the time-stepping strategy is set in this
    case to a fixed critical stability time-step. For Model I, this time-step is tIcr D 2  108 s.
                                             cr         cr
    For Model II and Model III, it is tII       D tIII    D 4:7  106 s. To facilitate, however,
    the assessment of the accuracy of the constructed ROM, a second time-stepping strategy with
    tI D tII D tIII D 2  108 s is considered, and all global relative errors are computed
    using this constant time-step and the sampling time-interval s D 1  106 s.
To evaluate the sensitivity of the performance of the hyper reduction method ECSW to the value
of the tolerance parameter of the sparse NNLS algorithm, similar implicit and explicit numerical
simulations are performed using, however, two coarser reduced meshes with jEj    Q D 907 (implicit
            Q
case) and jEj D 909 (explicit case). These are generated by setting D 0:1.
   Two deformed configurations illustrating the response of this structural system to the considered
blast event and computed using the HDM are presented in Figure 9.
   All measured CPU timings, speed-up factors, and computed global relative errors are summarized
in Table XVI. The following observations are noteworthy:
   In the implicit case, the nonlinear ROMs with (Model III) and without (Model II) hyper
    reduction do not predict sufficiently accurately the probe angular velocities. However, the com-
    parison between the results generated by the implicit Model II and Model III and that between

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                       DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                         NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                                                                           657

                              these results and their explicit counterparts suggest that the hyper reduction method ECSW
                              performs well and that the global relative errors in the probe angular velocities are primarily
                              due to the large computational time-step used in the implicit computations.
                             Otherwise, Model II performs well and very well in the implicit and explicit cases, respectively;
                              the hyper reduction method ECSW performs very well in both cases when is set to 0:01 (1%
                              relative error in energy transfer from the original FE mesh to the reduced mesh), and therefore,
                              Model III performs well and very well in the implicit and explicit cases, respectively. However
                              when is set to 0.1, Model III performs well only in the explicit case where the computational
                              time-step is significantly smaller than in the explicit case.
                             For D 0:01, Model III delivers in the implicit case a very good level of accuracy and a speed-
                              up factor of 141. In the explicit case, it delivers an excellent level of accuracy and an impressive
                              speed-up factor of the order of 23,000 (to which the ROM advantage for explicit time-stepping
                              contributes a factor equal to 235). This speed-up is obtained despite the fact that because of its
                              small size, a ROM is not as amenable as an HDM to parallel processing on 128 cores.
                             For D 0:1, Model III delivers in the explicit case a very good level of accuracy and an even
                              greater speed-up factor of the order of 63,300.
   Selected displacements and velocities computed at the probe located in the immediate neighbor-
hood of the charge (see Figure 8) using both considered implicit and explicit time discretizations
are also displayed in Figures 10 and 11. The results shown in these figures are consistent with the
accuracy findings formulated earlier, based on the quantitative results summarized in Table XVI.


                                          0.06                                                                                                       0.12
        node 128471 z-displacement (m)




                                                                                        Model I                                                                                              Model I
                                                                                                                      node 128471 x-rotation (rad)




                                                                                       Model II                                                                                             Model II
                                          0.05                                         Model III                                                      0.1                                   Model III


                                          0.04                                                                                                       0.08

                                          0.03                                                                                                       0.06

                                          0.02                                                                                                       0.04

                                          0.01                                                                                                       0.02

                                               0                                                                                                       0
                                                   0     0.002     0.004       0.006       0.008     0.01                                                   0      0.002   0.004    0.006       0.008    0.01
                                                                      time (s)                                                                                                time (s)

Figure 10. Underbody blast of a V-hull vehicle: computed probe displacements and rotations (implicit
                                       generalized-˛ method).


                                         100                                                                                                         500
                                                                                     Model I                                                                                                  Model I
node 128471 z-velocity (m/s)




                                          90                                        Model II                                                                                                 Model II
                                                                                    Model III                                                        400                                     Model III
                                                                                                            node 128471 x-angular




                                          80
                                          70                                                                                                         300
                                                                                                                velocity (rad/s)




                                          60
                                          50                                                                                                         200
                                          40                                                                                                         100
                                          30
                                          20                                                                                                           0
                                          10
                                                                                                                                                     -100
                                           0
                                         -10                                                                                                         -200
                                               0       0.0002    0.0004    0.0006       0.0008     0.001                                                    0     0.0002   0.0004   0.0006      0.0008   0.001
                                                                    time (s)                                                                                                   time (s)

Figure 11. Underbody blast of a V-hull vehicle: computed probe velocities and (convected) angular
                           velocities (explicit central difference method).

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                                                                                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
658                                          C. FARHAT ET AL.


                                           7. CONCLUSIONS

A projection-based framework for the reduction of high-fidelity, fully nonlinear, FE structural
dynamics models is presented. It is rigorous in the sense that it distinguishes between displacement
DOFs that belong to a vector space, and finite rotation DOFs that belong to the three-dimensional
rotation group that has a natural manifold structure. It applies to each of these two different types
of DOFs’ different reduction treatments. This nonlinear model reduction framework is also com-
prehensive as it considers both cases of constant and configuration-dependent mass matrices, and
both implicit and explicit time discretizations. It differentiates between all of these cases as well
as their combinations in order to minimize computational complexity. A hyper reduction method
that is natural for FE computations is also proposed for equipping any nonlinear model reduction
method, including the framework presented in this paper, with a means for computing fast and
accurate approximations of the projection onto a subspace of tangent matrices and force vectors.
Unlike other approximation techniques such as the EIM and its discrete variant, the proposed hyper
reduction method is physics based and driven by more than accuracy considerations. It does not
approximate the vector function of interest directly. Instead, it approximates on a reduced mesh, as
accurately as desired, the virtual works performed by a set of training values of this function along
the components of a constructed ROB. Therefore, it controls the numerical energy associated with
the approximation and therefore controls numerical stability. The application of the overall nonlinear
model reduction technology proposed in this paper to a set of academic, non parametric, but never-
theless challenging nonlinear structural dynamics problems taken from the literature demonstrates
its robustness and accuracy. Its application to the simulation of the transient response of a generic V-
hull vehicle to an underbody blast event highlights its potential for reducing the CPU time required
by realistic high-fidelity models by up to four orders of magnitude, while maintaining a good level
of accuracy. The integration of the concept of local reduced-order bases [51] into the overall non-
linear model reduction methodology described in this paper and its equally successful application
to nonlinear parametric applications are the subject of a companion paper.

          APPENDIX A: DYNAMIC TANGENT STIFFNESS MATRIX FOR HDM P2

Here, the notation is simplified by omitting the superscript j and subscript n C 1  ˛f from the
representation of a current state. In this case, the dynamic tangent stiffness matrix for the HDM P2
can be written as
                                                       "                       #
                                                             1˛m
                        dy n                                           m 0
                      K      .'; „n / D K .'; „n / C     ˇ .1˛f /t 2

                                                                0        H .ƒ/
The reader is referred to the main body of this paper for the definition of all terms appearing in the
previous equation except for H .ƒ/. This term, which is due to nonlinear inertial forces, is given by
 H .ƒ/ D 0:5 Œg .ƒ;  .ƒ/ ; A .ƒ//
                                                                                   !
                                        1  ˛m         
                                  Cƒ             JC     .Œ .ƒ/ J  ŒJ .ƒ/ / D.ƒ/
                                     ˇ 1  ˛f t 2    tˇ
where g.ƒ; ; A/ is the restriction of the inertial forces in the spatial description to the rotational
DOFs (i.e., the vector of spatial inertial moments) and can be written as
                                   g .ƒ; ; A/ D ƒ .JA C Œ J/                                    (A.1)
and
                                                 !                  
                                          1  ˛f           t 1  ˛f .2ˇ  /
            .ƒ/ D     ‰ƒn .ƒ/ C 1                   n C                      An
                   tˇ                        ˇ                      2ˇ
                                                                       
                      1  ˛m                  1  ˛m         ˛m  1
           A .ƒ/ D                ‰ ƒn .ƒ/           n C          C 1   An
                   ˇ.1  ˛f /t 2               tˇ            2ˇ

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                              659

Finally, D.ƒ/ is the Jacobian of ‰ƒn .exp. ƒ /ƒ/ with respect to (w.r.t.) ƒ , evaluated at           ƒ D 0.
In this work, D.ƒ/ is computed using automatic differentiation in forward mode [52].

                 APPENDIX B: TRANSFORMATION OF INERTIAL MOMENTS

Substituting the expressions (20) into the definition (A.1), pre-multiplying the result by T.‰I /, and
recalling the following identity [36]
                                           T .‰I / ƒ D TT .‰I /
lead to the following definition of the transformed vector of inertial moments
                                                                                        
  gN ‰I ; ‰P I;‰R I D TT .‰I / J T .‰I / ‰     RI CTP ‰I ; ‰
                                                           PI ‰ P I C T .‰I / ‰P I JT .‰I / ‰
                                                                                            PI
                                                                                  
                                                                     
                        T
                     D T .‰I / JT .‰I / ‰  R I C T .‰I / JTP ‰I ; ‰
                                                    T               PI
                                                                                   
                                                   C TT .‰I / T .‰I / ‰P I JT .‰I / ‰
                                                                          
                                                                                     PI

The coefficient matrix associated with the generalized acceleration-dependent term appearing in the
previous equation is identical to that appearing in the second row-block of the mass matrix defined
in (45). Furthermore, the coefficient matrix associated with the generalized velocity-dependent term
can be equivalently written in the form used in the second row-block of the coefficient matrix of
the velocity-dependent inertial forces given in (45), by observing that the cross product obeys the
following identity under matrix transformations
                                .Ma/  .Mb/ D det.M/MT .a  b/
It follows that
                   
     gN ‰I ; ‰   R I D TT .‰I / JT .‰I / ‰
             P I;‰                       RI
                                                                                   
                      C TT .‰I / JT  P ‰I ; ‰                   P I T .‰I /1 JT .‰I / ‰
                                            P I C det .T .‰I // ‰                       PI
                                                                   

and the vector of reduced inertial forces for the ROM P2Ra is
                    
                 T            mVu yR
               V                             D V T MN .Vy/V yR C V T CN .Vy; V y/
                                                                               P V yP
                      gN .V‰ y; V‰ y;
                                   P V‰ y/
                                        R


         APPENDIX C: DYNAMIC TANGENT STIFFNESS MATRIX FOR ROM P2RA

The dynamic tangent stiffness matrix associated with the ROM P2Ra can be expressed as follows
                                                   "     1˛m
                                                                              #
                                                                    m    0
                   KN dy n             N
                           .q; „n / D K .q; „n / C   ˇ .1˛ f /t 2

                                                            0         N .‰I /
                                                                      H
where all terms appearing in the previous expression are defined in the main body of this paper,
except HN .‰I /, which is due to the nonlinear inertial forces. This term is given by
                                                                
                                                                                  
HN .‰I / D C2 ‰I ; gO ‰I ; ‰            R I .‰/ C T .‰I /T J C1 ‰I ; ‰
                            P I .‰I / ; ‰                                     R I .‰I /
                                                                                           !
                   1  ˛m                                                            
           C                                      P
                                T .‰I / C C5 ‰I ; ‰I .‰I / C                      P
                                                                        C4 ‰I ; ‰I .‰I /
              ˇ 1  ˛f t 2                                       tˇ
                                                                                                   
                                                                                       
                        P                          P
           C T .‰I / ‰I .‰I /  J  JT .‰I / ‰I .‰I /  C1 ‰I ; ‰I .‰I / C  P                T .‰I /
                                                                                         tˇ
                     
where gO ‰I ; ‰P I;‰
                   R I is the vector of convected inertial moments

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                          Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                          10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
660                                                C. FARHAT ET AL.


                                               
                 P I;‰
         gO ‰I ; ‰   R I D J T .‰I / ‰   P ‰I ; ‰
                                     RI CT      PI ‰
                                                   P I C T .‰I / ‰
                                                                 P I JT .‰I / ‰
                                                                              PI
                                                                    

and
                                                   !                   
                                           1  ˛f            t 1  ˛f .2ˇ  /
      P I .‰I / D
      ‰               .‰I  ‰I n / C 1                ‰P In C                     R In
                                                                                   ‰
                  tˇ                           ˇ                       2ˇ
                                                                           
      R I .‰I / D   1  ˛m                     1  ˛m P In C   ˛m   1       R In
      ‰                         .‰I  ‰I n /         ‰                C1 ‰
                  ˇ 1  ˛f t 2                   tˇ             2ˇ
Here, C1 .‰I ; ‰ P I / is the Jacobian of T.‰I /‰    P I w.r.t. ‰I , C1 .‰I ; ‰
                                                                              R I / is the Jacobian of T.‰I /‰ RI
w.r.t. ‰I , C2 .‰I ; g/                                     T                            P
                        O is the Jacobian of T.‰I / gO w.r.t. ‰I , C4 .‰I ; ‰I / is the Jacobian of
P I;‰
T.‰     P I /‰
             P I w.r.t. ‰ P I , and C5 .‰I ; ‰
                                             P I / is the Jacobian of T.‰P I;‰   P I /‰
                                                                                      P I w.r.t. ‰I . Closed-form
expressions for these Jacobian matrices are given in [35].

                                               ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was started while the fourth author was at Stanford University. All authors acknowledge the partial
support by the Army Research Laboratory through the Army High Performance Computing Research Center
under Cooperative Agreement W911NF-07-2-0027. The first author also acknowledges the partial support
by the Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-11-1-0707, and the third author also acknowledges
the partial support by a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship. The content of this
publication does not necessarily reflect the position or policy of any of the aforementioned institutions, and
no official endorsement should be inferred.


                                                     REFERENCES
 1. Freund R. Model reduction methods based on Krylov subspaces. Acta Numerica 2003; 12:267–319.
 2. Prud’homme C, Rovas D, Veroy K, Machiels L, Maday Y, Patera AT, Turinici G. Reliable real-time solution of
    parametrized partial differential equations: reduced-basis output bound methods. Journal of Fluids Engineering-
    Transactions of the ASME 2002; 124(1):70–80.
 3. Veroy K, Prud’homme C, Rovas D, Patera A. A posteriori error bounds for reduced-basis approximation of
    parametrized noncoercive and nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations. Proceedings of the 16th AIAA
    Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference, Vol. 3847, Orlando, Florida, 2003.
 4. Cuong NN, Veroy K, Patera AT. Certified real-time solution of parametrized partial differential equations. In
    Handbook of Materials Modeling. Springer, 2005; 1529–1564.
 5. Avery P, Farhat C, Reese G. Fast frequency sweep computations using a multi-point Padé-based reconstruc-
    tion method and an efficient iterative solver. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2007;
    69(13):2848–2875.
 6. Hetmaniuk U, Tezaur R, Farhat C. Review and assessment of interpolatory model order reduction methods for
    frequency response structural dynamics and acoustics problems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
    Engineering 2012; 90:1636–1662.
 7. Hetmaniuk U, Tezaur R, Farhat C. An adaptive scheme for a class of interpolatory model reduction methods for
    frequency response problems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2013; 93:1109–1124.
 8. Thomas JP, Dowell EH, Hall KC. Three-dimensional transonic aeroelasticity using proper orthogonal
    decomposition-based reduced-order models. Journal of Aircraft 2003; 40(3):544–551.
 9. Kim T, Hong M, Bhatia KG, Sengupta G. Aeroelastic model reduction for affordable computational fluid dynamics-
    based flutter analysis. AIAA Journal 2005; 43(12):2487–2495.
10. Lieu T, Farhat C, Lesoinne M. Reduced-order fluid/structure modeling of a complete aircraft configuration. Computer
    Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 2006; 195(41):5730–5742.
11. Lieu T, Farhat C. Adaptation of aeroelastic reduced-order models and application to an F-16 configuration. AIAA
    Journal 2007; 45(6):1244–1257.
12. Amsallem D, Farhat C. Interpolation method for adapting reduced-order models and application to aeroelasticity.
    AIAA Journal 2008; 46(7):1803–1813.
13. Amsallem D, Farhat C. An online method for interpolating linear parametric reduced-order models. SIAM Journal
    on Scientific and Statistical Computing 2011; 33:2169–2198.
14. Amsallem D, Cortial J, Farhat C. Towards real-time computational-fluid-dynamics-based aeroelastic computations
    using a database of reduced-order information. AIAA Journal 2010; 48(9):2029–2037.
15. Amsallem D, Farhat C. Stabilization of projection-based reduced-order models. International Journal for Numerical
    Methods in Engineering 2012; 91(4):358–377.
16. Han S, Feeny B. Enhanced proper orthogonal decomposition for the modal analysis of homogeneous structures.
    Journal of Vibration and Control 2002; 8(1):19–40.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                            10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    NONLINEAR MODEL REDUCTION AND ENERGY-CONSERVING SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING                                          661

17. Amsallem D, Cortial J, Carlberg K, Farhat C. A method for interpolating on manifolds structural dynamics reduced-
    order models. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2009; 80(9):1241–1258.
18. Ryckelynck D. A priori hyperreduction method: an adaptive approach. Journal of Computational Physics 2005;
    202:346–366.
19. Grepl MA, Maday Y, Nguyen NC, Patera AT. Efficient reduced-basis treatment of nonaffine and nonlinear partial
    differential equations. ESAIM: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Analysis 2007; 41(03):575–605.
20. Nguyen N, Peraire J. An efficient reduced-order modeling approach for non-linear parametrized partial differential
    equations. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2008; 76(1):27–55.
21. Astrid P. Reduction of Process Simulation Models: A Proper Orthogonal Decomposition Approach. Technische
    Universiteit Eindhoven, 2004.
22. Astrid P, Weiland S, Willcox K, Backx T. Missing point estimation in models described by proper orthogonal
    decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 2008; 53(10):2237–2251.
23. Chaturantabut S, Sorensen DC. Discrete empirical interpolation for nonlinear model reduction. Proceedings of the
    48th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, held jointly with the 28th Chinese Control Conference, IEEE,
    Shanghai, China, 2009; 4316–4321.
24. Galbally D, Fidkowski K, Willcox K, Ghattas O. Non-linear model reduction for uncertainty quantification in large-
    scale inverse problems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2010; 81(12):1581–1608.
25. Carlberg K, Bou-Mosleh C, Farhat C. Efficient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares Petrov–Galerkin pro-
    jection and compressive tensor approximations. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2011;
    86(2):155–181.
26. Carlberg K, Farhat C, Cortial J, Amsallem D. The GNAT method for nonlinear model reduction: effective implemen-
    tation and application to computational fluid dynamics and turbulent flows. Journal of Computational Physics 2013;
    242:623–647.
27. An SS, Kim T, James DL. Optimizing cubature for efficient integration of subspace deformations. ACM Transactions
    on Graphics 2008; 27(5):165.
28. Chung J, Hulbert G. A time integration algorithm for structural dynamics with improved numerical dissipation: the
    generalized-˛ method. Journal of Applied Mechanics 1993; 60(2):371–375.
29. Marsden JE, Ratiu TS. Introduction to Mechanics and Symmetry: A Basic Exposition of Classical Mechanical
    Systems, Vol. 17. Springer, 1999.
30. Simo JC, Wong KK. Unconditionally stable algorithms for rigid body dynamics that exactly preserve energy and
    momentum. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 1991; 31(1):19–52.
31. Bauchau OA, Trainelli L. The vectorial parameterization of rotation. Nonlinear Dynamics 2003; 32(1):71–92.
32. Manton JH. A framework for generalising the Newton method and other iterative methods from Euclidean space to
    manifolds, 2012. preprint arXiv:1207.5087.
33. Stuelpnagel J. On the parametrization of the three-dimensional rotation group. SIAM Review 1964; 6(4):422–430.
34. Tournier M, Reveret L. Principal geodesic dynamics. Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics
    Conference on Computer Animation, Eurographics Association, Singapore, Singapore, 2012; 235–244.
35. Mäkinen J. A formulation for flexible multibody mechanics. Lagrangian geometrically exact beam elements using
    constraint manifold parametrization. Tampere University of Technology, Research Report 2004; 2004:3–89.
36. Ibrahimbegović A, Frey F, Kožar I. Computational aspects of vector-like parametrization of three-dimensional finite
    rotations. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 1995; 38(21):3653–3673.
37. Cardona A, Geradin M. A beam finite element non-linear theory with finite rotations. International Journal for
    Numerical Methods in Engineering 1988; 26(11):2403–2438.
38. Krysl P, Lall S, Marsden J. Dimensional model reduction in non-linear finite element dynamics of solids and
    structures. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2001; 51(4):479–504.
39. Farhat C, Lesoinne M, LeTallec P. Load and motion transfer algorithms for fluid/structure interaction problems
    with non-matching discrete interfaces: momentum and energy conservation, optimal discretization and application to
    aeroelasticity. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 1998; 157(1-2):95–114.
40. Amaldi E, Kann V. On the approximability of minimizing nonzero variables or unsatisfied relations in linear systems.
    Theoretical Computer Science 1998; 209(1):237–260.
41. Lawson CL, Hanson RJ. Solving Least Squares Problems, Vol. 161. SIAM, 1974.
42. Peharz R, Pernkopf F. Sparse nonnegative matrix factorization with `0 -constraints. Neurocomputing 2012; 80:38–46.
43. Farhat C, Geuzaine P, Brown G. Application of a three-field nonlinear fluid-structure formulation to the prediction
    of the aeroelastic parameters of an F-16 fighter. Computers and Fluids 2003; 32:3–29.
44. Geuzaine P, Brown G, Harris C, Farhat C. Aeroelastic dynamic analysis of a full F-16 configuration for various flight
    conditions. AIAA Journal 2003; 41:363–371.
45. Farhat C. A simple and efficient automatic FEM domain decomposer. Computers and Structures 1988; 28(5):
    579–602.
46. Farhat C, Lantéri S, Simon HD. TOP/DOMDEC, a software tool for mesh partitioning and parallel processing.
    Journal of Computing Systems in Engineering 1995; 6(1):13–26.
47. Nielsen MB, Krenk S. Conservative integration of rigid body motion by quaternion parameters with implicit
    constraints. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2012; 92(8):734–752.
48. Wilkins ML, Guinan MW. Impact of cylinders on a rigid boundary. Journal of Applied Physics 1973; 44(3):
    1200–1206.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                  Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                    DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                             10970207, 2014, 9, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4668 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
662                                                  C. FARHAT ET AL.


49. Simo J. Algorithms for static and dynamic multiplicative plasticity that preserve the classical return mapping schemes
    of the infinitesimal theory. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 1992; 99(1):61–112.
50. Scherer R, Felczak C, Halstead S. Vehicle and crash-dummy response to an underbelly blast event. 54th Stapp
    Conference (Oral Only), Scottsdale, Arizona, 2010.
51. Amsallem D, Zahr MJ, Farhat C. Nonlinear model order reduction based on local reduced-order bases. International
    Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2012; 92(10):891–916.
52. Phipps E, Pawlowski R. Efficient expression templates for operator overloading-based automatic differentiation. In
    Recent Advances in Algorithmic Differentiation. Springer, 2012; 309–319.




Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                  Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2014; 98:625–662
                                                                                                    DOI: 10.1002/nme
