INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL FOR NUMERICAL METHODS IN ENGINEERING
Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
Published online 3 March 2015 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/nme.4820




   Structure-preserving, stability, and accuracy properties of the
 energy-conserving sampling and weighting method for the hyper
       reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models

                   Charbel Farhat1,2,3,*,† , Todd Chapman1 and Philip Avery1
                   1 Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford, CA 94305-4035, USA
                            2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford, CA, USA
     3 Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering Stanford University, Mail Code 4035, Stanford,

                                                  CA 94305, USA




                                                  SUMMARY
The computational efficiency of a typical, projection-based, nonlinear model reduction method hinges on
the efficient approximation, for explicit computations, of the scalar projections onto a subspace of a residual
vector. For implicit computations, it also hinges on the additional efficient approximation of similar projec-
tions of the Jacobian of this residual with respect to the solution. The computation of both approximations
is often referred to in the literature as hyper reduction. To this effect, this paper focuses on the analysis
and comparative performance study for nonlinear finite element reduced-order models of solids and struc-
tures of the recently developed energy-conserving mesh sampling and weighting (ECSW) hyper reduction
method. Unlike most alternative approaches, this method approximates the scalar projections of residuals
and/or Jacobians directly, instead of approximating first these vectors and matrices then projecting the result-
ing approximations onto the subspaces of interest. In this paper, it is shown that ECSW distinguishes itself
furthermore from other hyper reduction methods through its preservation of the Lagrangian structure asso-
ciated with Hamilton’s principle. For second-order dynamical systems, this enables it to also preserve the
numerical stability properties of the discrete system to which it is applied. It is also shown that for a fixed
set of parameter values, the approximation error committed online by ECSW is bounded by its counterpart
error committed off-line during the training of this method. Therefore, this error can be estimated in this case
a priori and controlled. The performance of ECSW is demonstrated first for two academic but nevertheless
interesting nonlinear dynamic response problems. For both of them, ECSW is shown to preserve numerical
stability and deliver the desired level of accuracy, whereas the discrete empirical interpolation method and its
recently introduced unassembled variant are shown to be susceptible to failure because of numerical instabil-
ity. The potential of ECSW for enabling the effective reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models
of solids and structures is also highlighted with the realistic simulation of the nonlinear transient dynamic
response of a complete car engine to thermal and combustion pressure loads using an implicit scheme. For
this simulation, ECSW is reported to enable the reduction of the CPU time required by the high-dimensional
nonlinear finite element dynamic analysis by more than four orders of magnitude, while achieving a very
good level of accuracy. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received 30 April 2014; Revised 30 September 2014; Accepted 1 October 2014

KEY WORDS:       ECSW; Galerkin projection; Hamilton’s principle; hyper reduction; mesh sampling; model
                 reduction; nonlinear dynamics; proper orthogonal decomposition; structure preserving

                                             1. INTRODUCTION

Model reduction is desired, if not indispensable, for many parametric applications including
computational-based design and optimization, statistical analysis, embedded computing, and real-


*Correspondence to: Charbel Farhat, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
  94305-4035, USA.
† E-mail: cfarhat@stanford.edu



Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
                                                                                                             10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1078                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


time optimal control. It is also essential for those what if? problem scenarios where real-time
simulation responses are needed [1, 2]. For computational models based on the semi-discretization
or full discretization of PDEs, it is typically performed using a Galerkin or Petrov–Galerkin projec-
tion. Today, it is a reasonably well-developed process for linear semi-discrete and discrete problems
where the resulting reduced-order models (ROMs) consist of reduced vectors and matrices of the
form V T f and W T K V , respectively. Here, the superscript T denotes the transpose, and
   f 2 RN is a vector that can depend on a set of configuration or analysis parameters %k ,
    k D 1; : : : ; Np , and N is the dimension of the high-dimensional computational model (HDM).
    For many applications in science and engineering, N is the number of DOFs and is very large.
   K 2 RN N is a matrix that can also depend on the same or a different set of configuration or
    analysis parameters %l .
   The columns of V 2 RN n form a reduced-order basis (ROB) along which the solution of
    interest u 2 RN is further approximated—that is, u  Vy—and n denotes the dimension of
    this ROB. In general, y 2 Rn is known as the vector of generalized or reduced coordinates,
    and n  N .
   The columns of W 2 RN n form a reduced-order test basis. They can also be interpreted as the
    constraints that are forced on the approximate solution u  Vy so that y is uniquely defined,
    assuming that W T K V is non-singular.
   W D V corresponds to a Galerkin approximation, and W ¤ V to a Petrov–Galerkin one.
   If the high-dimensional problem is formulated in the complex plane C, R can be replaced in
    the preceding expressions and throughout the remainder of this paper by C.
For a given application, the construction of V is typically based on the pre-computation of solution
‘snapshots’ and their sensitivities with respect to the parameters %k [3], for various problems related
to the application. In general, these problems are formulated using the same high-dimensional para-
metric computational model characterized, for example, by K and f . However, they are generated
using pre-sampled values of %l and/or %k and therefore pre-sampled values of K.%l / and/or f .%k /.
In the POD method based on snapshots [4], which has stood the test of time, the idea is usually to
pre-compute a large number of snapshots—particularly for unsteady/dynamic problems where the
time t can be interpreted as a parameter—then compress these into a low-dimensional ROB using,
for example, the SVD method. In the original form of the reduced-basis method [5], a large num-
ber of snapshots is also pre-computed, but no data compression is explicitly performed. Instead, an
error estimator, when available, is used to discriminate between the pre-computed snapshots and
construct the desired low-dimensional ROB.
   For PDE-based nonlinear problems, model reduction is not as well developed. Typically, the
nonlinear high-dimensional problem of interest is formulated as a residual problem of the form
r.u/ D 0, for implicit solution strategies in which u is sought after in incremental form u.
Similar to that in the linear case, the increments are approximated as u  Vy, where V is
a pre-computed ROB and y 2 Rn . For problems characterized by different physical regimes,
moving features, discontinuities, or fronts, the solution space can be partitioned into sub-regions that
characterize the nonlinear features of the solution of interest, and a local ROB V can be constructed
off-line and assigned to each sub-region [6, 7]. In any case, whether V is a local or global ROB,
the approximation u  Vy leads to r.Vy/  0, where r 2 RN . Then, to determine the
increment vector of generalized coordinates y, at least two approaches have been pursued so far
in the literature. The first determining y by solving the minimization problem [8–11]

                                      y D arg min n kr.V´/kB1                                       (1)
                                              ´2R


where B1 2 RN N denotes a metric suitable for the application of interest. The second approach
mimics the linear case. It squares the nonlinear system of equations r.Vy/ D 0 by projecting it
onto the desired subspace—which leads to

       V T B2 r.Vy/ D 0 (Galerkin)           or     W T B2 r.Vy/ D 0 (Petrov–Galerkin)              (2)

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                    Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                             10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                             1079


where B2 2 RN N denotes another preferred metric—and then it determines y by solving the
resulting system of nonlinear equations. For many applications, the quality of the resulting ROMs is
sensitive to the choice of the metric B1 or B2 [12, 13]. An optimal choice for these metrics remains
a research topic. For explicit solution strategies, the same approaches hold using u and y instead of
the increments u and y.
   Because of the nonlinearity, both approaches outlined earlier call in general for an iterative solu-
tion method to determine the vector of generalized coordinates y in the case of an implicit solution
strategy. Whichever iterative scheme is chosen for this purpose, it must in principle evaluate at each
iteration the residual r.Vy/. For explicit computational strategies, whichever solution scheme is
chosen must evaluate at each step the residual r.Vy/. This is quite unfortunate because even though
the nonlinear ROM resulting from (1) or (2) is of dimension n  N , the computational cost asso-
ciated with the evaluation of r.Vy/ or r.Vy/ scales with N . For some applications where the
dependence of r on V can be pre-computed to obtain r.Vy/ D s.y/ .or r.Vy/ D s.y// where
s 2 RN —for example, when r is a polynomial function of u (or u)—the aforementioned scalabil-
ity issue can be avoided by pre-computing off-line the coefficients of the function s [14]. However,
for many nonlinear computational mechanics problems, the dependence of r on V cannot be pre-
computed, and if it can, the computational complexity of this process may be overwhelming. For
such cases, a more general approach for avoiding the aforementioned scalability issue is to compute
an approximant of r.Vy/ .or r.Vy// using an approach whose computational complexity scales
with n  N . For this purpose, several methods have been proposed. All of them are referred to in
this paper as hyper reduction methods, even though many of them were developed before the words
‘hyper reduction’ were coined in [15]. Most of these methods are related and differ only in the
details and the level of theoretical support they enjoy. The underlying common idea is to interpolate
a nonlinear function such as r.Vy/ at a few of its entries using some empirically derived basis func-
tions. This idea can be traced back at least to the gappy POD method, which was first introduced
in [16] for the purpose of image reconstruction. Subsequently, this method has witnessed several
adaptations to hyper reduction [17–19]. The empirical interpolation method (EIM) introduced later
in [20] follows the same general idea. However, this method can also operate at the continuous level.
Furthermore, it enjoys a greater level of theoretical support, at least for elliptic problems. A vari-
ant of EIM, which uses ‘best [interpolation] points’ and a POD basis, was also introduced in [21].
Related or similar approaches have been developed specifically for hyper reduction at the semi-
discrete [22, 23] and fully discrete [10, 11, 24, 25] levels. Among these, the discrete EIM (DEIM)
(also [26]) distinguishes itself by its simplicity and usability. A somehow lighter version of this
method, which is also tailored for finite element (FE) computations, has been recently introduced
in [27] under the name unassembled DEIM (UDEIM). The Gauss–Newton with approximated ten-
sors (GNAT) method [10] distinguishes itself by its Petrov–Galerkin interpretation, consistency and
discrete-optimality conditions, and successful application to turbulent-flow [11] problems. A recent
variant of this method, which focuses on nonlinear mechanical and structural dynamics systems, was
proposed in [28]. This method trades the Petrov–Galerkin approach of GNAT with a pure Galerkin
approach and designs the algebra to preserve the Lagrangian structure of second-order dynamical
systems. However, it adopts a computational framework that is not natural for FE computations and
has been assessed only for a simple, academic, truss problem.
   At this point, two observations are noteworthy. First, all hyper reduction methods mentioned
earlier have been developed with an exclusive focus on accuracy, and little if any attention to
numerical stability, with the exception of the method described in [28]. Second, none of them has
been demonstrated and much less evaluated for the hyper reduction of non-academic second-order
dynamical systems. Within this context, an alternative, energy-based hyper reduction method was
most recently developed in [29, 30] and named the energy-conserving (mesh) sampling and weight-
ing (ECSW) method. Even though developed independently and from a different perspective, it
turns out that this method is related to the cubature-based approach proposed in [31] for com-
puter graphics applications. Unlike all hyper reduction methods outlined earlier, ECSW does not
approximate r.Vy/ and then evaluate W T r.Vy/ .or V T r.Vy//. Instead, it approximates the prod-
uct W T r.Vy/ .or V T r.Vy// directly. Most importantly, while ECSW can be extended in principle
to various problems and approximation methods, it was developed primarily for the hyper reduction

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                    Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1080                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


of nonlinear second-order dynamical systems semi-discretized by the FE method. For this purpose,
it first samples a given high-dimensional FE mesh and attributes to each sampled element a weight-
ing coefficient. Collectively, these coefficients are determined off-line so that the work performed
on the reduced FE mesh by a set of training dual functions along a set of conjugate primal func-
tions matches its counterpart performed on the high-dimensional FE mesh. For example in solid and
structural mechanics, the training dual functions are force functions, and the reduced-order primal
functions are low-dimensional virtual displacement approximations. Because of this energy conser-
vation property, it was argued in [30] that ECSW addresses the numerical stability issue, which is
critical for second-order systems. However, no theoretical analysis was offered to support this argu-
ment. It was also argued that even though ECSW approximates directly the scalar projections of
a nonlinear function instead of the function itself, it is capable of delivering a high level of accu-
racy. In particular, it was reported that for the simulation by an explicit nonlinear FE method of
the transient response of a vehicle to an underbody blast event, ECSW enabled the reduction of the
CPU time required by the high-dimensional model by an impressive factor of 23,000. For all these
reasons, the main objectives of this follow-up paper are twofold: (i) to back ECSW with a theoreti-
cal grounding and present some additional, important, structure-preserving, distinctive properties of
this method and (ii) to perform a comparative performance study of ECSW, DEIM, and UDEIM for
nonlinear FE ROMs of solids and structures.
    To this effect, the content of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, nonlinear FE dynamic
models of solids and structures are first organized in two broad classes. Then, the dimensional reduc-
tion of these models by projection-based methods is briefly described, and the context of this paper
is set to the hyper reduction of the resulting nonlinear ROMs. In Section 3, the hyper reduction
method ECSW is reviewed. A subdomain-by-subdomain version of this method is also proposed
to reduce its computational complexity. In Section 4, ECSW is shown to preserve the Lagrangian
structure associated with Hamilton’s principle. Therefore, it also preserves the numerical stability
properties of the discretized FE model to which it is applied. This is a major advantage over alter-
native hyper reduction methods such as DEIM and UDEIM. In Section 5, an a priori error bound
for the ECSW approximation is developed in the case where a set of parameter values is fixed,
and the impact of this bound on the accuracy analysis of a discretized FE model to which ECSW
is applied is also analyzed. In Section 6, a comparative performance study of ECSW, DEIM, and
UDEIM is performed for two different nonlinear dynamic problems taken from the literature. Then,
the performance of ECSW for CPU-intensive FE problems is showcased with the nonlinear tran-
sient dynamic analysis of a complete car engine using an implicit scheme. For this problem, ECSW
is shown to enable the reduction by four orders of magnitude of the CPU time required by the non-
linear dynamic analysis using the high-dimensional FE model, while delivering a very good level
of accuracy. Finally, Section 7 offers concluding remarks on hyper reduction in general, and ECSW
in particular.


          2. DIMENSIONAL MODEL REDUCTION IN NONLINEAR FE DYNAMICS

2.1. Nonlinear semi-discrete FE dynamic models of solids and structures
The sources of nonlinearities in semi-discrete FE dynamic models of solids and structures are multi-
ple. They can be related to geometric effects or material modeling, or to problem formulations where
the configuration space is a nonlinear manifold as in beams, shells, and rigid-body problems under-
going finite rotations. They can also be associated with configuration-dependent external forces and
moments, such as surface pressure-induced and follower nodal forces and moments, or with nonlin-
ear kinematic constraints such as those arising in the modeling of rigid connections and joints and
contact inequalities. For the purpose of projection-based model reduction, nonlinear semi-discrete
FE dynamic models can be divided into two groups: those characterized by constant FE mass matri-
ces and those characterized by configuration-dependent FE mass matrices [30]. At the fully discrete
level, each of these two groups can be further subdivided into two classes of explicit and implicit
nonlinear discrete models.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                              10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                            1081

2.1.1. Models with constant mass matrices. When the sources of nonlinearities in a semi-discrete
FE dynamic model are confined to geometric effects and/or material modeling, this model leads in
the undamped case to the following semi-discrete initial value problem (IVP)
                                         R /  f int .u.t /; „.t // D f ext .t /
                                       M u.t
                                                              u.0/ D u0
                                                                                                                       (3)
                                                              u.0/
                                                              P     D uP 0
                                                             „.0/ D „0
where M 2 RN N is a constant, symmetric, positive definite mass matrix, t denotes time, u.t / 2
RN is the displacement vector, a dot denotes a time derivative, „.t / 2 RN„ is the vector of N„
time-dependent internal variables associated with one or multiple nonlinear constitutive relations,
f int .u; „/ 2 RN is the vector of internal forces, and f ext .t / 2 RN is the vector of external forces.
In what follows, the time dependence of u (and its time derivatives) and „ is not explicitly written,
to keep the notation uncluttered.
   The generalization of the preceding IVP to the damped case is straightforward. Therefore, it is
not discussed specifically in this paper because of space limitation.

2.1.2. Models with configuration-dependent mass matrices. When some sources of nonlinearity
emanate from finite rotations, configuration-dependent external forces and moments, and/or nonlin-
ear kinematic constraints, the semi-discrete FE dynamic model may lead instead (Remark 1) to an
IVP of the form (e.g., [30])‡
                    M.'.t //a.t / C C.'.t /; v.t //v.t /  f int .'.t /; „/ D f ext .'.t /; t /
                                                                      '.0/ D '0
                                                                                                                       (4)
                                                                       v.0/ D v0
                                                                     „.0/ D „0
where '.t / is a time-dependent manifold-valued generalized displacement function; M.'/ 2 RN N
is a configuration-dependent, usually unsymmetric, generalized mass matrix; a.t / 2 RN and v.t / 2
RN are the vectors of generalized accelerations and velocities, respectively; and C.'; v/ 2 RN N
is another configuration-dependent matrix associated with the velocity-dependent inertial forces.
Again, the time dependence of ', v, and a is not explicitly written in what follows in order to keep
the notation uncluttered.
Remark 1
For FE dynamic models with finite rotations, the configuration dependence of the mass matrix M
depends on certain details of the problem formulation such as the frame(s) of reference in which the
forces and moments are resolved, and the representation of the angular acceleration. Therefore, (4)
is a general representation of FE dynamic models of this type.
  The form of the IVP (4) can represent a solid or a structure with both translational and rotational
DOFs. Specifically, the generalized displacement function ' may be represented by a set of absolute
nodal translations u and nodal rotation variables ƒ
                                                      ' D ¹u; ƒº
Each nodal translation variable in the subset u belongs to the linear space R3 . Each nodal rotation
variable in the subset ƒ belongs to the manifold of special orthogonal transformations SO.3/ of
dimension 3. This manifold is defined as
                       SO.3/ D ¹ƒi 2 R33 W ƒTi ƒi D ƒi ƒTi D I; det .ƒi / D 1º
where I denotes the identity matrix.

‡ In this paper, the sign convention chosen in [30] for f int is changed in order to be consistent with the sign convention
 usually adopted in Lagrangian dynamics for this force vector (Equation (29)).

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                               Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                     DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1082                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


  In what follows, the preceding notation is slightly abused for the sake of convenience, and u and
other subsets of the same form are alternatively interpreted as a single vector in R3Nn , where Nn
denotes the number of nodes of an FE model.
  The generalized velocity and acceleration vectors can be defined using the convected angular
                                    P respectively, as follows:
velocity  and angular acceleration ,
                                                             
                                      uP                        uR
                               vD                and     aD P
                                                               
The convected angular velocity  is defined as [32]
                                              Œ D ƒT ƒ
                                                        P                                               (5)
Here and throughout the remainder of this paper, a boldface letter is used to designate a diago-
nal or block-diagonal matrix constructed as the direct sum of a set of 3  3 matrices associated
with the nodes of an FE model. For example, assuming for simplicity that each FE node has three
rotational DOFs,
                                               2                  3
                                                 ƒ1 0 : : : 0
                                 MNn           6 0 ƒ2 : : : 0 7
                                               6                  7
                            ƒD            ƒi D 6 :: :: : :     : 7
                                     i D1      4 : :       : :: 5
                                                         0   0 : : : ƒNn
Also, in (5) and throughout the remainder of this paper, the operator Œ designates the skew-
symmetric block-diagonal matrix form of the set of axial three-dimensional vectors to which this
operator is applied. Hence,
                                            2                    3
                                                0 i´ iy
                                 def
                                     M Nn 6                      7
                            Œ D
                                       i D1
                                            4  i´     0 ix 5
                                              iy ix        0
where x, y, and ´ denote the three canonical spatial directions.

2.2. Low-dimensional subspace approximations
Projection-based model order reduction (MOR) methods are based on the assumption that the solu-
tion of a parametric problem of interest represented by an HDM can actually be approximated in a
subspace of lower dimension n  N , using a ROB V 2 RN n . For the IVP (3), this assumption
can be formulated as
                                             u  uc C Vy.t /                                            (6)
where uc 2 RN is a fixed constant vector often chosen as the initial displacement u0 and y.t / 2 Rn
is the vector of generalized coordinates introduced in Section 1. In what follows, the time depen-
dence of y (and its time derivatives) is not explicitly written in order to keep the notation uncluttered.
Differentiating (6) with respect to time gives
                                      uP  V yP    and       uR  V yR                                  (7)
   For the IVP (4), the assumption of lower-dimensional representation of the solution can be
formulated as (see [30] for details)
                               '  ¹uc C Vu y; exp.Œ‰I .ƒc / C V‰ y /º                                (8)
where ‰I denotes the set of total axis-angle rotation vectors at each node of the FE mesh measured
with respect to the unrotated configuration designated here by the subscript I (identity matrix),
                                           Œ‰I .ƒ/ D log .ƒ/

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                 10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                 1083


ƒc 2 SO.3/Nn is a set of fixed rotation matrices, Vu 2 R3Nn n and V‰ 2 R3Nn n are two ROBs
for the approximation of u and ‰I , respectively, and exp and log denote the matrix exponential and
principal logarithm functions, respectively. The lower-dimensional approximations of the vectors of
generalized velocities and accelerations consistent with (8) can be written as
               v  Z1 .V‰ y/V yP           and       a  Z1 .V‰ y/V yR C Z2 .V‰ y; V‰ y/V
                                                                                      P yP                (9)
where
                                                 "                  #
                                                     Vu 2 R3Nn n
                                           V D                                                           (10)
                                                     V‰ 2 R3Nn n

and Z1 2 RN N and Z2 2 RN N are two configuration-dependent, block-diagonal, and easily
invertible matrices whose explicit dependence on V‰ y and V‰ yP is given in [30].
   For simplicity and without any loss of generality, it is assumed in the remainder of this paper that
uc D 0 and ƒc D I .

2.3. Galerkin projections
In general, Galerkin projections are preferred for the MOR of semi-discrete FE models of solids and
structures, because these models are usually based on elliptic PDEs.
   For nonlinear semi-discrete FE dynamic models with a constant mass matrix M , it is convenient
to orthonormalize the ROB of interest with respect to M , so that
                                                 V TMV D I                                               (11)
In this case, substituting the approximations (6) and (7) into (3) and pre-multiplying the resulting
semi-discrete equation by V T (B2 D I ) lead to the reduced-order IVP
                                    yR  V T f int .Vy; „/ D V T f ext .t /
                                                       y.0/ D V T M u0
                                                                                                         (12)
                                                       y.0/
                                                        P   D V T M uP 0
                                                       „.0/ D „0
   For nonlinear semi-discrete FE dynamic models with a configuration-dependent mass matrix (4)
for which the ROB V 2 RN n can be written as in (10) with N D 6Nn , it is not computationally
efficient to orthonormalize the constant ROB V (10) with respect to M.'/ because this mass matrix
varies with time. In the absence of this orthonormalization, however, the reduced-order mass matrix
will be neither constant nor diagonal. A noteworthy consequence is that the time discretization by an
explicit scheme of the resulting reduced-order IVP will not be computationally efficient. This issue
was successfully addressed in [30] by introducing the constant mass matrix MI D M.'I /, where
'I D ¹0; I º designates the undeformed configuration; orthonormalizing the constant ROB matrix
V with respect to the constant mass matrix MI so that
                                                 V T MI V D I
substituting the approximations (8) and (9) into (4); pre-multiplying the angular momentum balance
equations by a carefully constructed transformation matrix; pre-multiplying the resulting global
equation by V T ; and performing some algebraic manipulations to obtain the following reduced-
order IVP
                                    P V yP  V T fNNint .Vy; „/ D V T fNNext .Vy; t /
                 yR C V T CN .Vy; V y/
                                                                                      
                                                                    T           u0
                                                           y.0/ D V MI
                                                                              ‰I .ƒ0 /        (13)
                                                             y.0/
                                                              P   D V T MI Z11 v0
                                                             „.0/ D „0

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                              DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                        10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1084                                    C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY



Here, CNN 2 RN N , fNNint 2 RN , and fNNext 2 RN are transformations of the matrix C and vectors of
internal and external forces f int and f ext , respectively, whose expressions can be found in [30].

2.4. Computational bottlenecks
Each of the two ODEs governing the nonlinear reduced-order IVPs (12) and (13) can be written in
the residual form
                                                      rr .y; y;
                                                             P y/
                                                                R D0                                            (14)
where the subscript r is used here and throughout the remainder of this paper to designate a reduced-
order quantity.
  The semi-discrete residual (14) or its time discretization by an explicit scheme gives rise to
reduced-order terms of the form
                                                fr .y/ D V T f .Vy/                                             (15)
where the HDM vector f 2 RN can be associated with inertial, damping, external, and/or internal
forces and fr 2 Rn is the reduced-order counterpart of f . To keep the notation simple and unclut-
tered, no subscript or superscript is used to designate the time instance t n in the event of a time
discretization, and the dependence of f and fr on the configuration or analysis parameters %k is
acknowledged but not expressed. For the same reason, in Equation (15) and in what follows, the pos-
sible dependence of f and fr on V yP and y, P respectively (in the case of a configuration-dependent
mass matrix), and of both of these quantities on „ (in the case of a nonlinear constitutive relation)
is acknowledged but no longer expressed.
   Similarly, the time discretization and/or linearization of the semi-discrete residual (14) by an
implicit scheme gives rise to reduced-order vectors of the form (15) and to reduced-order matrices
of the form§
                                               Kr .y/ D V T K.Vy/V                                              (16)
where the HDM matrix K 2 RN N is the dynamic tangent stiffness matrix associated with the
linearization of f and Kr 2 Rnn is the reduced-order counterpart of K. Again, no subscript
or superscript is used to designate either the time instance t n or the i-th Newton or Newton-like
iteration in the event of a time discretization, and the dependence of K and Kr on y,P „, and/or the
configuration or analysis parameters %l is acknowledged but not expressed.
   Despite the fact that fr (15) and Kr (16) are reduced-order quantities of size n  N , the com-
putational complexity of their evaluation for given values of y scales with the dimension N of the
underlying HDM. Therefore, in the context of MOR, which aims at enabling real-time computing,
the evaluation of these terms is in general a showstopper. For example, the straightforward eval-
uation of the reduced-order vector fr .y/ (15) is more computationally expensive than that of the
full-order vector f .Vy/, as it requires both the evaluation of this HDM vector and the computation
of the matrix–vector product V T f .Vy/. Pre-computing once for all the dependence of f .Vy/ and
K.Vy/ on V can address the CPU aspect of this computational bottleneck. However, as stated in
the introduction of this paper, such a pre-computation is unfeasible for many problems in nonlinear
computational mechanics. Achieving a computationally efficient reduction of such problems calls
instead for developing a suitable hyper reduction method.
Remark 2
Throughout the remainder of this paper, indexing a vector with the subscript r introduced in (14) to
designate a reduced-order quantity designates specifically the result of the pre-multiplication of the
HDM version of this vector by the transpose of the ROB V —that is,


§ In principle, Equation (16) could be written as K        T
                                                r .y/ D V K.Vy/V ; however, the increment notation is dropped
 here and in the remainder of this paper for simplicity and because Newton’s algorithm and its variants can also be
 formulated in non-incremental form.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                               Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                     DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                              1085


                                           ]r D V T ];   ]r 2 Rn
Similarly, indexing a matrix with the subscript r designates the result of the post-multiplication
and pre-multiplication of the HDM version of this matrix by the ROB V and its transpose V T ,
respectively—that is,
                                      r D V T V;       r 2 Rnn


                  3. AN ENERGY-BASED METHOD FOR HYPER REDUCTION

Most recently, an energy-based method was developed in [29, 30] for the hyper reduction of nonlin-
ear FE dynamic models. It was named the ECSW method. It is reviewed here in order to facilitate
the derivation of its structure-preserving properties in Section 4 and its error analysis in Section 5.

3.1. Basic idea: energy conservation on a reduced mesh
Recall that the main objective of any hyper reduction method is to compute approximants of fr .y/
(15) and Kr .y/ (16) whose computational complexities scale with the size of the nonlinear ROM—
that is, with n  N . In the context of an FE method and an FE mesh with Ne elements represented
by the set E D ¹e1 ; e2 ; : : : ; eNe º, these reduced quantities can be expressed as
                   X                                                   X
          fr .y/ D     V T LTe fe .Le Vy/          and     Kr .y/ D        V T LTe Ke .Le Vy/Le V (17)
                   e2E                                             e2E

                 ned N
where Le 2 R          is the Boolean matrix that localizes a global matrix such as V to the DOFs
                                                                                                e
associated with element e, ned denotes the number of DOFs associated with element e, and fe 2 Rnd
denotes the contribution of element e to the force vector f .
  The main idea behind the hyper reduction method ECSW presented in [29, 30] for approximat-
ing the expressions (17) is due to an important observation and the general approach presented
in [33] for approximating the transfer of a generalized force from one mesh associated with
a semi-discretization subspace to another mesh associated with a different semi-discretization
subspace:
   The observation highlighted here is that each column Vj of the ROB V represents a virtual
    displacement of the solid or structure of interest. Therefore, each corresponding row frj of
    fr .y/ in (17) represents the virtual work performed by the force vector f .Vy/ along the virtual
    displacement Vj . Similarly, each coefficient Krij D ViT K.Vy/Vj represents the virtual work
    performed by the force K.Vy/Vj along the virtual displacement Vi . In other words, the vector
    function fr .y/ and matrix function Kr .y/ are virtual energy functions.
   In [33], an energy-conserving approach was developed for computing the approximation f S on
    the wet surface of a structural mesh of an aerodynamic load vector whose approximation on the
    wall boundary of a fluid mesh is denoted here by f F . In this approach, attention was focused
    on the fluid–structure interface where the virtual fluid and structural displacement fields are
    denoted here by uO F and uO S , respectively. For many applications, the discretization of the fluid
    side of this interface is much finer than that of its structural side. For this reason, the higher-
    dimensional vector u PO F is first approximated in terms of its lower-dimensional counterpart uO S
    as uO  N uO D j Nj uO Sj , where N is a matrix of shape functions, Nj denotes its j -th
         F          S

    column, and j may refer to a node or an element of the discretization of the structural side of
    the fluid–structure interface (algebraically, this is akin to u  Vy). Note that for each virtual
                                                           S
    structural displacement uO S D ej , where ej 2 Rn is the vector with 1 in its j -th entry and
    0 everywhere else and n denotes the dimension of uO S , one has uO F  Nj . It follows that
                                S

    each column of N can also be interpreted as a virtual fluid displacement on the fluid side
    of the fluid–structure interface. Next, to compute an approximation f S of the aerodynamic
    load vector of interest, the approach proposed in [33] requires that the virtual work of the
                                                                            T             T
    fluid forces performed on the wall boundary of the fluid mesh, uO F f F  uO S N T f F , be

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                 10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1086                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


     equal to the virtual work of the structural forces performed on the wet surface of the structural
     mesh. For uO S D ej , this gives ejT N T f F  ejT f S —that is, NjT f F  ejT f S D fjS . While
     this result delivers an expression of f S , it also shows that each energy NjT f F computed on
     the fine (fluid) mesh—and therefore all energies represented by the product N T f F , which is
     computed on the fine (fluid) mesh—can be approximated on the coarser (structural) mesh using
     the principle of virtual work.
Following the same idea and energy conservation framework based on the principle of virtual work,
ECSW approximates the energy functions fr .y/ D V T f .Vy/ and Kr .y/ D V T .K.Vy/V / on a
coarser FE mesh using the following natural, FE-like approach
                                           X
                        fr .y/  fQr .y/ D     e? V T LTe fe .Le Vy/
                                             EQ E
                                                X                                                        (18)
                                    e r .y/ D
                           Kr .y/  K                   e? V T LTe Ke .Le Vy/Le V
                                                EQ E

where
   Here and throughout the remainder of this paper, the tilde notation is used to designate a
    quantity that is hyper reduced using the ECSW method as in (18).
   The sampled elements of the FE mesh represented by the subset of elements EQ D
    ¹eQ1 ; eQ2 ; : : : ; eQne º  E and their nodes define a reduced FE mesh.
   The collective role of the element weights e? , e 2 E,           Q is to compensate for the missing
    contributions to the energy computations of the non-sampled elements represented by EnE.         Q
   8e, e? > 0 so that each element contribution e? V T LTe Ke .Le Vy/Le V to Kr .y/ represents
    a strain-like energy associated with the positive definite (or semi-definite) stiffness matrix
    e? Ke .Le Vy/.
   The subset of elements EQ and the associated vector of weights  ? D Œ1? ; 2? ; : : : ; N? T
                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                    are
    simultaneously determined so that for a given vector of generalized coordinates y 2 Rn , the
    approximations (18) deliver the desired level of accuracy for the smallest possible subset of
    elements E.       Q
   As mentioned in Section 1, for those applications where the dependence on V of the semi-discrete
residual r.Vy/ can be pre-computed to obtain r.Vy/ D s.y/ where s 2 RN —for example, when
r.u/ is a polynomial function of u—pre-computing off-line the coefficients of the function s.y/ [14]
is an alternative to hyper reduction. Noting that the approximations (18) can be defined at both
the semi-discrete and discrete levels, it follows that for those applications where only some of the
contributions to r.Vy/ can be pre-computed off-line, the hyper reduction method ECSW can be used
alone to hyper reduce all contributions to V T r.Vy/ or in combination with the pre-computation of
the dependence of r.Vy/ on V to hyper reduce only those contributions to r.Vy/ for which the
dependence of r.Vy/ on V cannot be pre-computed or pre-computed efficiently.
Remark 3
In principle, the approximations (18) could be applied without dimensional reduction—that is, with
V D I (or y D u). However, numerical experiments show, in general, the number of mesh elements
that must be sampled so that these approximations are accurate correlates, as can be expected, with
the dimension of V . Hence, in the absence of any dimensional reduction, the computation of accu-
rate approximations of the form (18) may become as computationally intensive as that of fr .y/ and
Kr .y/ without any approximation, which defeats the purpose of these approximations.
  In summary, whereas DEIM, UDEIM, GNAT, and most if not all other hyper reduction methods
published in the literature approximate reduced nonlinear functions such as fr .y/ D V T f .Vy/ and
Kr .y/ D V T K.Vy/V by approximating first f .Vy/ and K.Vy/ and then computing the scalar
projections V T f .Vy/ and V T K.Vy/V , ECSW approximates fr .y/ and Kr .y/ directly. Further-
more, the approximations of these generalized forces (18) computed by ECSW are designed to

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                        Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                              DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                     10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                     1087

preserve on the reduced FE mesh the virtual works performed on its high-dimensional counterpart
by the force vectors f .Vy/ and K.Vy/Vj , j D 1; : : : n, along the set of conjugate displacements
Vj , j D 1; : : : ; n. Again, this idea for computing the transfer of forces from a high-dimensional
FE mesh to a reduced FE mesh is similar to that underlying the conservative approach developed
in [33] for transferring aerodynamic forces across fluid and structure meshes with non-matching dis-
crete interfaces. Hence, ECSW controls the numerical energies associated with the hyper reduction
approximations it performs. In Section 4, it will be shown that for this reason, ECSW also con-
trols the effect of these approximations on the numerical stability of the time integrator chosen for
solving the underlying reduced-order IVP (12) or (13).
   It is interesting to note that approximation formulae similar to (18) were developed earlier in
[31] for computer graphics applications, using a cubature-based approach. However, the ECSW
approximations distinguish themselves from these formulae in several ways, including the weighting
of entire elements rather than individual cubature points, and the training approach and solution
method described next for determining the weights of the approximations.

3.2. Pre-computation of the reduced mesh and associated weighting coefficients
Because the vector of generalized coordinates y is problem dependent, the numerical values of the
energies fr .y/ and Kr .y/ (17) to be approximated on a reduced FE mesh are known only at run
time. For this reason, the reduced FE mesh and its associated vector of element weights  ? are
determined off-line using training forces. Because the forces involved in the definitions of fr and
Kr (17) depend on the vector of generalized coordinates, the most appropriate training forces are
those that are constructed from the projection of pre-computed solution (displacement) snapshots u
onto the ROB of interest, V . For example, if the solution snapshots are generated using a discrete
version of the nonlinear FE dynamic model (12), the low-dimensional approximations V  , where
the notation  is used here to designate a training vector of generalized coordinates, can be computed
using at least two different approaches as follows:

                          V  D V .V T V /1 V T u           or       V D V V TMu                           (19)

In the first case, V  is the orthogonal projection, with respect to the Euclidean metric, of u onto the
subspace spanned by the ROB V . In the second case, V  is the oblique projection, with respect to
the M metric, of u onto the same subspace (see [30] for a short discussion on the relative merits
of each approach). In either case, the subsequent computation of the training functions fr . / and
Kr . / is in general straightforward.
   Let Nt denote the number of training force configurations. For each one of them, define
                                  gle .l / D V T LTe fe .Le V l / 2 Rn
                                                            Ne
                                                            X
                                       bl D fr .l / D            gle .l / 2 Rn                             (20)
                                                            eD1
                                           l D 1; : : : Nt ; e D 1; : : : ; Ne
where each low-dimensional approximation V l is computed as outlined in (19). Gather all training
data defined earlier in block form as follows:
                   2                  3                            2      3
                       g11    g1Ne                                b1
                   6               :: 7 2 RnNt Ne                 6      7
             G D 4 ::: : : :        : 5              and     b D 4 ::: 5 2 RnNt               (21)
                      gNt 1    gNt Ne                                           bNt
Finally, define
                                ®                                   ¯
                             ˆ D  2 RNe W kG  bk2 6 "kbk2 ;  > 0

where " > 0 is a small positive tolerance. From (18), it follows that  ? can be defined as the solution
of the constrained optimization problem

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                            Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1088                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


                                               ? D arg min kk0                                       (22)
                                                       2ˆ

where k  k0 is the ‘zero-norm’, which counts the number of non-zero components in the vector to
which it is applied, and EQ follows as the set of indices corresponding to the non-zero entries of  ? .
   Unfortunately, the optimization problem (22) is an NP-hard problem [34]. Noting that in practice
all that is needed to perform the ECSW approximations (18) is to extract from a given FE mesh a set
of elements that is sufficiently small to deliver the desired speedup and equip it with a corresponding
set of weights to achieve the desired accuracy, it was proposed in [30] to substitute problem (22) by
the inexact non-negative least-squares (NNLS) problem
                                              arg min kG  bk22                                    (23)
                                                    2‡

where ‡ is the feasible set defined by
                                           ‡ D ¹ 2 RNe W  > 0º
and solve the easier problem (23) using a variant of the Lawson and Hanson active set iterative
algorithm [35]. This variant, which is described in [30], terminates the iterations prematurely when
either the following convergence criterion is reached
                                             kG  bk2 6 "kbk2                                         (24)
or the number of elements in the active set reaches a specified upper limit. For this reason,
this variant of the Lawson and Hanson active set iterative algorithm is referred to as the sparse
NNLS solver.
Remark 4
In the damped case, the training is performed following the same approach outlined earlier, but using
additional damping (or dissipative) forces that depend on the velocity field. That is, the training
dissipative forces are constructed from the projection of pre-computed velocity snapshots uP onto the
ROB of interest, V .

3.3. Acceleration through domain decomposition
In theory, it is standard in model reduction (for parametric applications) to ignore the CPU cost
of off-line computations, on the premise that this cost is usually incurred only once. In practice,
however, it is important to minimize as much as possible this CPU cost in order to retain the appeal
of off-line computations. While the computation of the solution snapshots needed for constructing
the ROB V is perhaps the most CPU-intensive component of off-line computations, attention is
focused here on the sparse NNLS solver outlined earlier. Beyond a certain large value of the product
n  Nt of the number of training configurations and the size of the ROB V and/or beyond a certain
large size of the original FE mesh measured by its number of elements Ne , the CPU time required
by this solver on a serial computer for delivering a reduced FE mesh and its associated set of weights
can rapidly become unattractive. Admittedly, one can expect to amortize this CPU cost over the
number of online computations to be performed using the constructed nonlinear ROM. One can also
expect this part of the off-line computations to represent a small fraction of the total CPU cost that
would otherwise be required by the solution of the problem of interest using the HDM. Nevertheless,
the objective here is to minimize the computational cost associated with the construction of the
reduced FE mesh and the pre-computation of the associated set of weights, in order to make the
hyper reduction method ECSW as attractive and as computationally efficient as possible.
   To this effect, it is first noted that the NNLS algorithm described in [35] is inherently a sequen-
tial procedure. Then, it is noted once again that whereas an optimal solution of problem (23) is
always beneficial, all that is needed in practice is a small subset of elements EQ and a correspond-
ing set of weights that enables performing the approximations (18) rapidly and accurately. These
remarks suggest partitioning the FE mesh to be reduced into Ns subdomains and applying the sparse
NNLS solver in each subdomain independently. This is equivalent to partitioning the matrix G of

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                               10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                               1089

Equation (21) column-wise, computing b of Equation (21) for each column partition accordingly,
and applying the sparse NNLS solver to each column partition independently, thereby reducing the
computational complexity of this solver and enabling its embarrassingly parallel implementation.
  Nevertheless, the simple idea proposed here for accelerating the construction of the reduced FE
mesh and the pre-computation of the associated set of weights raises an interesting issue. Let
                             kGi i  bi k2 6 "i kbi k2 ;                 i D 1; : : : ; Ns                            (25)
denote the subdomain-level counterpart of the convergence criterion (24), where the subscript i
designates the restriction of a quantity to the i-th subdomain and "i is the equivalent of " in (24)
but for the i-th subdomain. In this context, "i and " are referred to in the remainder of this paper as
the local and global training tolerances, respectively. Then, the aforementioned issue can be stated
as follows. What should be the value of each local training tolerance "i so that the convergence
criterion (24) is satisfied for a desired global training tolerance "?
   In this work, the preceding issue is addressed by specifying a global tolerance " and computing
in each subdomain a local tolerance "i using the following ‘balancing’ approach
                              XNs                                         
                                                                  kbk2
                                   "i kbi k2  "kbk2 ) "i                    "                    (26)
                                                                 Ns kbi k2
                              i D1

In this case, from (25) and (26), it follows that
                            P
                            Ns                             P
                                                           Ns                     P
                                                                                  Ns
                                 kGi i  bi k2                   "i kbi k2              "kbk2
          kG  bk2   i D1                                 i D1                   i D1               Ns "kbk2
                    6                                  6                      D                  D            D"       (27)
            kbk2                     kbk2                       kbk2               Ns kbk2           Ns kbk2
This implies that setting the subdomain tolerance "i as in (26) guarantees that the solution vector
  computed by the parallel sparse NNLS solver outlined earlier will satisfy the global convergence
criterion (24).

 4. PRESERVATION OF THE LAGRANGIAN STRUCTURE AND NUMERICAL STABILITY

In this section, it is shown that the hyper reduction method ECSW distinguishes itself furthermore
from other hyper reduction methods through its preservation of the Lagrangian structure associated
with Hamilton’s principle. For second-order dynamical systems, this enables it to also preserve in
practice the numerical stability properties of the discrete system to which it is applied.
   For the sake of clarity, the case of conservative semi-discrete nonlinear dynamical systems is
discussed before the more general case of non-conservative counterparts is considered. Furthermore,
because of space limitation, attention is focused only on the case of a constant mass matrix. The
case of nonlinear semi-discrete dynamical systems with configuration-dependent mass matrices will
be discussed in a follow-up paper.

4.1. Conservative semi-discrete nonlinear dynamical systems
Let S denote a conservative, nonlinear dynamical system represented here by a nonlinear, semi-
discrete FE dynamic model MS . Let u, u,       R T , and V int denote the displacement vector, velocity
                                            P u,
vector, acceleration vector, kinetic energy, and internal potential energy associated with MS , respec-
tively. Assuming that u is defined with respect to a fixed global frame, the kinetic energy of the FE
representation MS of S can be written as
                                                     1 T
                                            T D T .u/
                                                   P D uP M uP                                    (28)
                                                     2
The internal potential energy of MS is related to the vector of internal forces introduced in (3) by
                                                                         T
                                                int           @V int
                                            f         .u/ D         .u/                                               (29)
                                                               @u

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                           10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1090                                  C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


Because S is assumed here to be a conservative system, the vector of external forces introduced in
(3) and applied to S is in this case time independent and derives from a potential V ext — that is,

                                                  @V ext T
                          f ext D fcext D                 .u/ , V ext .u/ D uT fcext                             (30)
                                                   @u
  Let

                                            V .u/ D V int .u/ C V ext .u/                                          (31)

denote the total potential function for MS . For this conservative system, Hamilton’s principle can
be written as
                      Z t2
                    ı      .T .u/
                               P  V .u//dt D 0       8 ıu j ıu.t1 / D ıu.t2 / D 0
                       t1                                                                      (32)
                                       , E D T .u/P C V .u/ D cst
where t2 > t1 > 0, ı designates a virtual displacement, and E is the total mechanical energy of MS .
The resulting Lagrange equations of motion are
                                                
                                        d @T         @V T
                                                        D0                                    (33)
                                        dt @uP       @u
   Equations (28)–(33) define a structure of the governing equations for the nonlinear semi-discrete
dynamical system of interest MS . Here and throughout the remainder of this paper, this structure is
referred to as the Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s principle.
   From Equations (28)–(31), it follows that the preceding equations of dynamic equilibrium can
also be written as
                                                                 T
                                                          @V int
                                            M uR C               .u/ D fcext                                       (34)
                                                           @u
Note that in the case of a conservative external load, Equation (34) is equivalent to the ODE
governing the IVP (3).
  From (6) and (7) and the orthogonality condition (11), it follows that the nonlinear ROM
associated with Equation (34) is described by the reduced equations of dynamic equilibrium
                                                             T
                                                    @V int
                                      yR C V T             .Vy/ D V T fcext                                        (35)
                                                   @.Vy/
                                                                           @V                     int T
Approximating in the preceding equation the nonlinear vector function V T @.Vy/ .Vy/ using the
hyper reduction method ECSW (Equation (18))—that is,
                          T                 T                           T
                   @V int          @VQ rint         X            @Veint
                   T                                     T T
                V           .Vy/             .y/ D    e V Le            .Le Vy/                                  (36)
                  @.Vy/             @y                         @.Le Vy/
                                                                  EQ E

where
                                                           X
                                          VQ rint .y/ D           e Veint .Le Vy/                                (37)
                                                          EQ E

can be interpreted as the internal energy associated with the reduced mesh, leads to the hyper-
reduced equations of motion
                                  X                                   T
                                                          @Veint
                           yR C           e V T LTe            .Le Vy/ D V T fcext                               (38)
                                                        @.Le Vy/
                                  EQ E


Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                  Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                        DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                  10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                  1091

  Now, from (6), (7), (28), (30), (31), and the orthogonality condition (11), it follows that the total
mechanical energy associated with the reduced nonlinear ROM (35) is
                               Er .y; y/
                                      P D T .V y/
                                               P C V int .Vy/ C V ext .Vy/
                                            Tr .y/
                                                P C Vrint .y/ C Vrext .y/                                 (39)
                                            1
                                           D yP T yP C Vrint .y/  y T V T fcext
                                            2
where
                   1 T
          Tr .y/
              P D    yP y;
                        P       Vrint .y/ D V int .Vy/;   and     Vrext .y/ D y T V T fcext (40)
                   2
Note that Equations (39) and (40) show that the Galerkin projection method preserves the
Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s principle, which is a well-known result.
  Hence, the time derivative of the expression of Er .y; y/
                                                         P given in (39) is
                       EPr .y; y; R D TPr .y/
                               P y/         P C VP rint .y/ C VP rext .y/
                                                 @V int
                                    D yR T yP C           .Vy/V yP  yP T V T fcext
                                                @.Vy/
                                                                 T
                                           T            @V int
                                                        T   T
                                     D yP yR C yP V             .Vy/  yP T V T fcext
                                                       @.Vy/
                                                                                !
                                                         int T
                                          T         T @V                 T ext
                                     D yP    yR C V            .Vy/  V fc
                                                      @.Vy/

From the preceding equation, (31), and (36), it follows that the time derivative of the total
mechanical energy EQr associated with the hyper-reduced nonlinear ROM (38) is

               EPQr .y; y;          P C VQP rint .y/ C VP rext .y/
                           R D TPr .y/
                        P y/
                                    P C VPQ r .y/
                               TPr .y/
                                    0                                                            1        (41)
                                             X                         int T
                                                                   @ V
                             D yP T @yR C          e V T LTe         e
                                                                             .Le Vy/  V T fcext A
                                                                 @.Le Vy/
                                               EQ E

  Finally, substituting (38) into the preceding equations leads to

                            EPQr .y; y;             VP r .y/ D 0 , EQr D cst
                                                 P Ce
                                        R D TPr .y/
                                     P y/
From this result, the definition of Tr .y/
                                        P given in (40), and (37), it follows that the hyper-reduction
method ECSW preserves the Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s principle and the
main consequence of this principle—in this case, the constant state of the total mechanical energy
of the conservative system of interest.

4.2. Non-conservative semi-discrete nonlinear dynamical systems
Next, consider the more general case where the nonlinear semi-discrete dynamical system S is
non-conservative for two common reasons:
   It contains dissipative forces that remain parallel and in opposite direction to the velocity vector
    uP and depend on its modulus kuk    P 2 . Typically, such forces are associated with a dissipation
    function D that is homogeneous of order m in the velocity DOFs—that is, one that verifies
                                          @D
                                              .u/uP T
                                               P D mD.u/   P                              (42)
                                          @uP
     For example, m D 1 corresponds to the case of dry friction, m D 2 to viscous damping, and
     m D 3 to aerodynamic drag. Hence, these dissipative forces can be written as

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                         Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                               DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                     10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1092                                  C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


                                                                 @D T
                                                f dis .u/
                                                       P D           .u/
                                                                       P
                                                                 @uP
   It is solicited by an additional set of non-conservative, time-dependent, external forces
    represented in MS by the additional external force vector fnc
                                                                ext
                                                                    .t /.
Furthermore, assume that in all elements of the nonlinear FE dynamic model MS , De has the same
degree of homogeneity m. In this case, the equality (42) implies
                                               @D e
                                   uP T LTe          .Le uP e / D mDe .Le u/
                                                                          P                                  (43)
                                              @Le uP
  For such a non-conservative system, Hamilton’s principle leads to

                                           TP C VP D mD C uP T fnc
                                                                  ext
                                                                                                             (44)

The corresponding Lagrange equations of motion can be written as
                                    
                             d @T         @V T @D T         ext
                                                    C fnc    D0                                           (45)
                            dt @uP        @u      @uP
These equations differ from their counterparts for a conservative system (33) only in the presence of
                            T
the additional terms  @@D
                         uP
                                    ext
                              and fnc   . Hence, the analysis performed herein focuses primarily on the
various contributions of these two terms. Otherwise, the concept of the Lagrangian structure associ-
ated with Hamilton’s principle and defined earlier remains the same. This structure is summarized
in this case by Equations (44) and (45).
   From (34), it follows that the equations of dynamic equilibrium (45) can be rewritten as
                                                            T
                                      @D T      @V int
                             M uR C        .u/
                                            P C        .u/ D fcext C fnc
                                                                       ext
                                                                           .t /                              (46)
                                      @uP        @u
and from (35), it follows that the nonlinear ROM associated with Equation (46) is described by the
reduced equations of dynamic equilibrium
                                                     T
                               @D             @V int                               
                  yR C V T             P CVT
                                    .V y/              .Vy/ D V T fcext C fnc
                                                                            ext
                                                                                .t /                         (47)
                             @.V y/
                                 P           @.Vy/
Equation (47) highlights the need for hyper reducing not only the nonlinear vector function
     @V int T                                                   @D
V T @.Vy/     .Vy/ but also the nonlinear vector function V T @.V y/
                                                                  P
                                                                     .V y/.
                                                                        P From (18), it follows that
the approximation of this additional nonlinear term by the hyper-reduction method ECSW can be
written as
                                      T
                    @D T        @DQ r        X               @D e T
                  T
                V        .V y/
                            P          .y/
                                         P D   e V T LTe           .Le V y/
                                                                           P                                 (48)
                  @.V y/
                      P          @yP                       @.Le V y/
                                                                  P
                                                         EQ E

where
                                                     X
                                       DQ r .y/
                                             P D            e De .Le V y/
                                                                         P                                   (49)
                                                    EQ E

can be interpreted as the dissipation function associated with the reduced mesh.
  Substituting (36) and (48) into (47) leads to the hyper-reduced equations of motion
                                                           T
                                                                     !
        X                   @D e T                 @Veint                                    
                T T
  yR C        e V Le                .Le V y/
                                            P C              .Le Vy/ D V T fcext C fncext
                                                                                          .t /               (50)
                         @.Le V y/
                                 P               @.Le Vy/
        EQ E


Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                            Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                               10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                             1093

   Now, from (41), (50), and (43) with the low-dimensional approximation u  Vy, it follows that
the time derivative of the total mechanical energy EQr associated with the hyper-reduced ROM (50) is
                                        d  T T ext 
EPQr .y; y;          P C VPQ r .y/ 
            R D TPr .y/
         P y/                               y V fnc .t /
                     0                  dt                                                            1
                             X                      int T
                                                 @V e                                               
              D yP T @yR C         e V T LTe             .Le Vy/  V T fcext C fnc         ext
                                                                                                 .t / A y T V T fPnc
                                                                                                                    ext
                                                                                                                        .t /
                                               @.Le Vy/
                             Q
                       0 E E                                        1
                          X                    @D e    T
              D yP T @         e V T LTe              .Le V y/  P A  y T V T fPnc
                                                                                    ext
                                                                                        .t /
                                            @.Le V y/P
                         EQ E
                      X
              D m          e De .Le V y/P  y T V T fPnc
                                                          ext
                                                              .t /
                       EQ E
                          P  y T fPnc
                  mDQ r .y/         ext
                                       r
                                         .t /
From the first and last lines of the preceding equation, it follows that

                                       P C VPQ r .y/ D mDQ r .y/
                                  TPr .y/                      P C yP T fnc
                                                                          ext
                                                                            r
                                                                              .t /                                    (51)

which in view of (49) and (44) proves that the hyper-reduction method ECSW preserves the
Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s principle for a non-conservative nonlinear dynam-
ical system too.

4.3. Numerical stability
A major consequence of the results derived in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 is that a time integrator applied
to the time discretization of a nonlinear FE Galerkin ROM of a solid or a structure hyper reduced by
ECSW can be expected to exhibit the same, if not better, numerical stability properties than those
exhibited when applied to the time discretization of the underlying HDM, for the following reasons.
   If the preferred time integrator is unconditionally stable when applied to the time discretization
of the HDM, it is either energy conserving or energy dissipating. In this case,
   If this time integrator is energy conserving, it is guaranteed to be unconditionally stable
    when applied to the nonlinear ROM hyper reduced by the ECSW method. This result follows
    directly from the preservation by ECSW of the Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s
    principle.
   If this time integrator is energy dissipating, it can be expected to be unconditionally stable when
    applied to the nonlinear ROM hyper reduced by the ECSW method. This is because in general,
    the energy of a Galerkin ROM can be expected to be bounded by the energy of the underlying
    HDM. This expectation is guaranteed, for example, for linear problems. For nonlinear ones, it
    may depend or not on the type of the nonlinearity. Regardless, a proof of this specific conjecture
    is beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, this expectation has been observed in practice
    on a large number of realistic, large-scale, nonlinear test problems.
   If the preferred time integrator is conditionally stable when applied to the time discretization of
the HDM, then
   This time integrator will also be conditionally stable when applied to the nonlinear ROM hyper
    reduced by ECSW. The justification is similar to that explained earlier.
   However, the domain of stability of the hyper-reduced nonlinear ROM can be expected in
    general to be larger or equal to its counterpart for the underlying HDM. For a hyper-reduced
    ROM that preserves the Lagrangian structure, this is because the ROM approximation u  Vy
    typically filters out the high-frequency mesh modes, (51) is a function of the vector of general-
    ized coordinates y and not of u, and the preservation of the Lagrangian structure prohibits the
    re-introduction of any spurious high-frequency mode to be avoided (e.g., [30, 36]).

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                               Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                     DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                           10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1094                                    C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


                                              5. ERROR ANALYSIS

An error analysis of ECSW is presented here for the case of a linear, non-conservative system with
viscous damping—that is, with
                                                   1 T
                                                D.u/
                                                  P DuP D uP
                                                   2
and a fixed set of parameter values %k . Furthermore, D 2 RN N is assumed to be symmetric so that
D is a homogeneous function of degree m D 2 in u,     P and Equation (44) holds in this case. Hence,
for this linear non-conservative system,
                             @D T                                                         @V T
             f d i s .u/
                      P D        .u/
                                   P D D uP             and           f int .u/ D            .u/ D Ku           (52)
                             @uP                                                          @u
Let
                                                                                                 
                                                                                            V 0
           Q D ŒK D 2 RN 2N ; Qr D ŒKr Dr  2 Rn2n ;                           V D       0 V       2 R2N 2n
                                                                                                               (53)
                 u                      y
           q D uP 2 R2N ;    and   x D yP 2 R2n

From (52) and (53), it follows that
                         f .q/ D f int .u/ C f d i s .u/
                                                      P D Qq                  and q D V x                         (54)

5.1. Estimation of the off-line and online hyper-reduction errors
Set the number of training conditions to Nt D 2n, and train ECSW using as snapshots
                                  q D V el , l D el ;                l D 1; : : : ; Nt                            (55)
               2n
where el 2 R is the vector with 1 in its l-th entry and 0 everywhere else. From (20), (21), (24),
and (53)–(55), it follows that
                                      v
                                      u Nt
                                      uX
                               kbk D t    2  kQ e k2 D kQ k r l 2               r F          (56)
                                                   lD1

where k ˇ kF denotes the Frobenius norm of a matrix ˇ and the error committed off-line by ECSW
(also (18)) during this training is
                                        v
                                        u Nt
                                        uX
                kEoff k2 D kG  bk2 D t
                                 
                                              k.Qe r  Qr /el k2 D kQe r  Q r kF
                                                                                   2        (57)
                                                     lD1

From (24) and (56), it follows that this error is bounded as follows:
                                               kEoff k2 6 "kQr kF                                                  (58)
                                                                 2n
   Similarly, noting that an online solution x 2 R                     (53) can be decomposed along the basis
¹el ºNt
     lD1
         as
                                                         Nt
                                                         X
                                                  xD           xl el
                                                         lD1
where xl 2 R, it follows that the approximation error committed online by ECSW is
                                                           Nt
                                                           X
                                  Q r  Qr /xk2 D k
                      kEon k2 D k.Q                                  Q r  Qr /el k2
                                                                 xl .Q
                                                           lD1
                                                                      0           1
                                  Nt
                                  X                                       Nt
                                                                          X                                        (59)
                              6                 Q r  Qr /el k2 6 @
                                        jxl j k.Q                              jxl jA kQ
                                                                                       Q r  Qr k F
                                  lD1                                  lD1
                                      Q r  QkF
                              6 kxk1 kQ


Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                  Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                        DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                              1095

From this inequality, (53), and (57), it follows that
                                    kEon k2 6 .kyk1 C kyk
                                                       P 1 /kEoff k2                                  (60)
and finally from (58), it follows that
                                   kEon k2 6 ".kyk1 C kyk
                                                       P 1 /kQr kF                                    (61)
   The first result (60) shows that the ECSW approximation error committed online is bounded by its
counterpart committed off-line during training. The second result (61) shows that the online approx-
imation error is controlled by the same tolerance " as the sparse NNLS solver. Both results highlight
the potential of the hyper-reduction method ECSW for delivering a desired level of accuracy.

5.2. Effect on the accuracy of a time discretization
As stated earlier and shown in Section 4.1, it is well-known that for a second-order dynamical sys-
tem, a Galerkin projection preserves the Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s principle.
As an example, one can mention the FE semi-discretization method, which can be interpreted in
the context of model reduction as a Galerkin projection technique applied to the reduction of the
dimensionality of the continuous form of the governing equations of dynamic equilibrium. Here,
this property can also be deduced from the application of the results established in Section 4 to
the particular case where ne D Ne and all weights e D 1. Hence, the Galerkin-based reduced-
order form of the dynamic equilibrium of the linear non-conservative system with viscous damping
introduced at the beginning of this section can be written as
                                   
                       d @Tr .y/  P      @Vr .y T       @Dr .y/
                                                              P T     ext
                                                @y             C fnc r
                                                                          .t / D 0
                       dt     @yP           /              @yP
From (52), it follows that this semi-discrete equation can also be written as
                                          
                              d @Tr .y/  P                       ext
                                             Kr y  Dr yP C fnc  r
                                                                     .t / D 0                         (62)
                             dt      @yP
  The hyper-reduced form of the preceding equation obtained using the ECSW method is
                                      
                          d @Tr .y/  P     er y  D
                                                  e r yP C fnc
                                                             ext
                                        K                    r
                                                                 .t / D 0
                         dt      @yP
Whichever time integration scheme of order p is applied to the time discretization of this hyper-
reduced equation, it generates a discrete solution y that satisfies
                                     
                         d @Tr .y/  P      er y  De r yP C fnc
                                       K                    ext
                                                                r
                                                                  .t / D O .t p /           (63)
                        dt      @yP
   Because y has a priori no reason to satisfy Equation (62), substituting y into this equation leads
to the discrete residual
                                              
                                 d @Tr .y/   P                       ext
                         ry D                    Kr y  Dr yP C fnc  r
                                                                         .t /                    (64)
                                 dt      @yP
  Subtracting both equations (63) and (64) that are satisfied by the same discrete solution y gives
                             ry D KQ r y C DQ r yP  Kr y  Dr yP C O .t p /
which in view of (53) can also be written as
                                      ry D .QQ r  Qr /x C O .t p /
Hence,
                                  kry k2 6 k.QQ r  Qr /xk2 C O .t p /

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                   10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1096                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


From (59), (61), and the preceding inequality, it follows that

                                                P 1 /kQr kF C O .t p /
                             kry k2 6 ".kyk1 C kyk

which shows that for a sufficiently small global training tolerance ", the ECSW approximations
preserve the order of accuracy of the chosen time discretization.


                                           6. APPLICATIONS

The ECSW hyper-reduction method discussed in this paper was implemented in the comprehensive
FE structural analyzer AERO-S [37, 38]. DEIM and UDEIM were also implemented in this code
for the purpose of performing comparisons. Here, the performances of all three hyper-reduction
methods in terms of stability, accuracy, and impact on the computational efficiency of MOR are
objectively compared for two academic and yet demonstrative nonlinear problems that are easy
to reproduce by the interested reader. The size of their HDMs is of the order of 104 DOFs. That
of their ROMs is of the order of 10 DOFs. Then, the performance of ECSW is highlighted for
a showcase problem associated with the realistic, implicit computation of the nonlinear transient
dynamic response of a complete car engine to thermal and combustion pressure loads. For this
problem, the HDM is on the order of 106 DOFs, and the ROM on the order of 102 DOFs.
   In all problems considered herein, the ROMs are constructed using the POD method based on
displacement snapshots and applied to the same configuration for which they are trained. For the
‘predictive’ performance of ECSW and that of the MOR approach described in this paper—that
is, performance for problem configurations that are different from those for which the ROMs are
trained—the reader is referred to [39].
   Given a computed time-dependent ROM solution u,         Q the corresponding global relative error in a
direction ˘ is defined here as
                               rP
                                    .u˘ .t /  uQ ˘ .t //T .u˘ .t /  uQ ˘ .t //
                                   t 2P
                      RE˘ D                rP                                    100%
                                                    u˘ .t /T u˘ .t /
                                             t 2P

where the subscript ˘ designates the displacement or rotation in the x, y, or ´ direction of the
global coordinate frame, u˘ .t / is the vector of ˘-displacement/rotation DOFs at time t extracted
from the solution obtained using the HDM of interest, uQ ˘ .t / is the vector of ˘-displacement/rotation
DOFs at time t extracted from the solution obtained using the ROM or hyper-reduced ROM
whose performance is being assessed, and P is the set of time stamps used in the evaluation of
RE˘ —that is,

                           P D ¹t 2 ¹t0 ; t0 C s; t0 C 2s; : : :º W t 6 tmax º

In the preceding definition of P , s denotes the sampling time interval chosen for the evaluation of
the global relative error, and tmax denotes the maximum simulated time.
   Throughout the comparison of all three hyper-reduction methods considered in this section, the
following nomenclature and notation are adopted:
   Full column rank DEIM/UDEIM ROB for the approximation of the nonlinear function of inter-
    est, U 2 RN mU , where mU D rank.U / 6 N . Usually, this ROB is computed by performing
    the SVD of the matrix of sampled force snapshots.
   Full column rank row selection matrix P D Œ ek1 ek2    ekmP  2 RN mP , where kl 2
    ¹1; : : : ; N º is referred to as the kl -th ‘index’, ekl 2 RN is the vector with 1 in its kl -th entry
    and 0 everywhere else, and mP D rank.P /.
                                                      mP
   An aspect ratio of DEIM/UDEIM, AR D m              U
                                                         . By construction, AR > 1.
   Matrix of sampled force snapshots, F D ¹f .t0 /; f .t1 /; : : : ; f .tNt /º.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                          Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                   10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                   1097

   Relative error of the off-line approximation of the preceding matrix function F ,

                                                     kV T .F  FQ /kF
                                           REoff D
                                                        kV T F kF
    where, as before, V denotes the ROB for the approximation of the solution of the problem and
    k ˇ kF denotes the Frobenius norm of ˇ.
   Models I, II, and III refer as in [10] to the HDM of interest, the corresponding ROM, and the
    hyper-reduced version of this ROM, respectively.
                                         TACPUI
   Model III speedup factor, SIII D TACPU        , where TACPUI (TACPUIII ) denotes the aggregate CPU
                                              III
    time of all processors performing in parallel a simulation based on model I (model III).
   Finally, it is noted that all computations reported herein are performed in double-precision arith-
metic on a parallel Linux cluster where each compute node consists of two quad-core Intel Xeon
E5345 processors running at 2.33 GHz inside a Dell Poweredge 1950 and has 16 GB of memory,
and the interconnect is a Cisco DDR InfiniBand. For the purpose of parallel processing or acceler-
ating the computation of the weights of the ECSW hyper-reduction method (Section 3.3), all mesh
partitioning is performed using an enhanced version of the greedy algorithm [40, 41].


6.1. Approach to comparative study of DEIM, UDEIM, and ECSW
The literature on DEIM [26], and recently UDEIM, typically assumes that after discretization or
semi-discretization, the driving term of the nonlinear PDE of interest—in this case, f int .u/—
naturally takes the form of the superposition of two linear and nonlinear functions and therefore
reports on the application of DEIM (and UDEIM) to the nonlinear function only. For nonlinear
structural problems, the nonlinearities associated with the vector of internal forces f int .u/ can arise
either from the use of nonlinear material laws (material nonlinearities), the nonlinear kinematics of
large motions and/or deformations (geometric nonlinearities), or both. Except in a few cases, such
as elasto-plastic problems with small displacements and rotations, these nonlinearities do not have
a natural linear–nonlinear splitting. However, as already carried out in [27] in the context of the
hyper-reduction of nonlinear FE ROMs using UDEIM, such a splitting can be performed artificially
as follows:

                                      f int .u/ D K.u0 /u C g int .u/                                     (65)

where K.u0 / is the tangent stiffness matrix evaluated at the initial displacement u0 and g int .u/ is
defined and computed as follows:

                                       g int .u/ D f int .u/ C K.u0 /u

Then, hyper reduction using DEIM or UDEIM is applied only to g int .u/ as follows:

           g int .Vy/  gQ int .Vy/ D U.P T U /C P T g int .Vy/
                                  ) f int .Vy/  K.Vy.0//Vy C U.P T U /C P T g int .Vy/

where .P T U /C D .P T U /1 if mU D mP (AR D 1) and .P T U /C denotes the pseudoinverse of
P T U if mP > mU (AR > 1).
Remark 5
In principle, there should be no reason to perform the splitting (65). However, it is the authors’
experience that for nonlinear FE structural dynamics models—which are second-order nonlinear
dynamical systems—the application of DEIM or UDEIM to the hyper reduction of f int .u/ systemat-
ically leads to numerical instability, while the application of these methods to g int .u/ is occasionally
stable. This could explain why this splitting was adopted in [27]. Additional comments on this issue
are provided in the remainder of this paper.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                          Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                             10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1098                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


Remark 6
The Jacobian of g int .Vy/ with respect to y is the Jacobian of U.P T U /C P T g int .Vy/ with respect
to y. Hence, this Jacobian is in general unsymmetric.
  While DEIM and UDEIM have been typically applied with AR D 1, the case AR > 1 is also
considered in this work in case it leads to a better hyper reduction. For this purpose, two different
approaches for achieving mP > mU are explored:
  (1) Using the standard DEIM algorithm to construct P and U such that mP D mU , then
      discarding the last nU columns of U to achieve the aspect ratio AR D mUmn  P
                                                                                    U
                                                                                      > 1.
  (2) Using the standard DEIM algorithm to construct P and U such that mP D mU , then after
      P is constructed, including all DOFs associated with active FE nodes—that is, nodes of the
      FE model that have at least one DOF selected by the DEIM algorithm as an index—in the
      row selection matrix P . In the remainder of this section, this approach is referred to as the
      ‘full node’ selection approach. Because UDEIM works with unassembled FE force vectors,
      this idea extends naturally to including all DOFs associated with active elements—that is,
      elements that have at least one DOF selected by the DEIM algorithm as an index. Therefore,
      in the context of UDEIM, this approach is referred to in the remainder of this paper as the
      ‘full element’ selection approach.
   On the upside, the first approach outlined earlier for achieving AR > 1 selects additional interpo-
lation indices that are optimal in the sense that they minimize the DEIM error bound. This approach
also gives direct control over the aspect ratio AR. On the downside, it may lead to a reduced mesh
that is larger than necessary for delivering an accurate approximation of the nonlinear function
of interest. On the other hand, the second approach is not guaranteed to add optimal interpola-
tion indices. Furthermore, it does not give explicit control over AR. However, it is considered here
because it has the merit of not increasing the size of the reduced mesh.
   Each of ECSW, DEIM, and UDEIM has different algorithmic parameters than can affect its
performance. Hence, benchmarking these methods against each other is a difficult task. Here, the
following benchmark strategy is adopted to perform meaningful and fair performance comparisons.
   In each case, two instances of the nonlinear ROM of interest are constructed using two POD
ROBs V of different dimensions n. The dimension of the first ROB is the smallest dimension for
which the nonlinear ROM based on this ROB delivers a global relative error RE˘ 6 1% for the
model II simulation of interest, where ˘ is the direction along which the displacement solution is
the largest. That of the second POD ROB is defined as twice the dimension of the first one.
   For DEIM and UDEIM, three different values of mU are considered: msmall  U     D n2 , mmedium
                                                                                          U      D n,
       large
and mU D 2n. For each of these values of mU , the aspect ratio is varied between AR D 1 and
AR D 4. For DEIM, the full node selection approach is used to achieve AR > 1. For UDEIM, both
of the full node and element selection approaches are considered for achieving the same objective.
                                                                               max
   For ECSW, the tolerance " (24) is varied in the range REmin                                 min
                                                                 off 6 " 6 REoff , where REoff and
    max
REoff are the minimum and maximum global relative errors, respectively, achieved by DEIM and
UDEIM for the model III simulation of interest when mU and AR are varied as outlined earlier.
However, the obtained performance results are reported only for those algorithmic configurations
that achieve RE˘ 6 20.

6.2. Dynamic response of a bending plate to a distributed load
First, the simple plate bending problem discussed in [27] and graphically depicted in Figure 1 (left)
is considered. The geometry of the plate is rectangular with dimension 40  20 mm. Its thickness is
0.8 mm. Its material has a density in the reference (undeformed) configuration o D 2700 kg/m3 .
It is modeled using an elastic constitutive law that can be expressed as a linear relation between
the stress resultants and their conjugate strain measures in the element corotated configuration.
Hence, the internal forces are in this case nonlinear functions of the nodal displacements due to the
nonlinear kinematics (geometric nonlinearities). Young’s modulus for this material is E D 70 GPa,
and Poisson’s ratio is  D 0:3. The plate is simply supported in all three directions along three edges

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                    Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                               1099




Figure 1. Dynamic plate bending problem (left) and vertical displacement at the middle of the free edge
      (right). Red arrows indicate vertical loading, and blue arrows designate the constrained DOFs.




Figure 2. Dynamic plate bending problem: reduced meshes for n D 10 (left) and n D 20 (right): dis-
crete empirical interpolation method (red), unassembled discrete empirical interpolation method (blue), and
                             energy-conserving sampling and weighting (green).



as shown in Figure 1 (left). Its fundamental frequency (for the interested reader) is 1:97  103 Hz.
It is subjected to a sudden, uniform, distributed, vertical, step load in the positive ´-direction of
magnitude 34 N/m2 .
   An undamped FE HDM of this problem is constructed using 400 three-noded shell elements with
six DOFs per node. The size of this HDM is N D 1263 DOFs. The IVP in this case is of the form
(4). Hence, it features a configuration-dependent mass matrix. This FE HDM is time discretized
using the implicit midpoint rule and a time-step size of t D 3  106 s. The solution computed
using this HDM is sampled at every time step. Therefore, s D 3  106 s. Figure 1 (right) shows
the time history of the vertical displacement at the middle of the free edge and contrasts it with
its counterpart time history predicted using the same HDM but with linear kinematics. This figure
reveals that the effect of the geometrical nonlinearities on the amplitude of the plotted time history
is significant.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1100                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY




Figure 3. Dynamic plate bending problem: variation with AR of the global relative error (RE) of the solu-
tion in the ´ direction obtained using nonlinear reduced-order models hyper reduced by discrete empirical
       interpolation method (DEIM)/unassembled discrete empirical interpolation method (UDEIM).


   The meshes depicted in Figure 2 are samples of the reduced meshes produced by all three hyper-
reduction methods DEIM, UDEIM, and ECSW. For DEIM and UDEIM, each considered value of
mU generates a different reduced mesh, but each of these reduced meshes can be used for any value
of the ROB dimension n. This is in contrast to ECSW that generates a different reduced mesh for
each different value of n and/or ".
   Figure 3 focuses on the global relative errors in the ´ direction, where the displacement solu-
tion is dominant, of the approximate solutions delivered by nonlinear ROMs with hyper reductions
performed using DEIM and UDEIM. Specifically, it reports the variations of these errors with the
aspect ratio AR for different values of n and mU . For mU D n D 10, only two data points are
reported. The reason is that for all other values of AR, both DEIM and UDEIM lead to numerically
unstable ROMs. For most of the other cases, increasing AR is found to improve the accuracy of the
solutions delivered by the hyper-reduced ROMs.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                               1101




Figure 4. Dynamic plate bending problem: variation with mU of the global relative error (RE) of the solution
computed using a nonlinear reduced-order model hyper reduced by discrete empirical interpolation method
                (DEIM)/unassembled discrete empirical interpolation method (UDEIM).




Figure 5. Dynamic plate bending problem: performance of discrete empirical interpolation method (red
C), unassembled discrete empirical interpolation method (blue ), and energy-conserving sampling and
                                         weighting (green ˘).

   Figure 4 reports the variations with mU of the global relative errors of the solutions delivered by
the ROMs that are hyper reduced using DEIM and UDEIM. Again, each missing data point in this
figure indicates a numerically unstable ROM for the corresponding value of mU . The reader can
observe that for this problem and n D 10, the full node and element selection approaches allow both
DEIM and UDEIM to deliver numerically stable ROMs. This figure also shows that for AR > 1,
DEIM and UDEIM lead to ROM solutions that are more accurate than for the case of AR D 1.
   Figure 5 plots for each considered-hyper reduction method and n D 10; 20, the variation with
the delivered speedup of the global relative error of the ROM solution in the ´ direction. At the
lower end of the spectrum of achieved speedups, ECSW appears to deliver a better accuracy than

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1102                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY




Figure 6. Dynamic plate bending problem: online–off-line accuracy comparisons: discrete empirical interpo-
lation method (red C), unassembled discrete empirical interpolation method (blue ), and energy-conserving
                                   sampling and weighting (green ˘).


both DEIM and UDEIM. At the higher end of this spectrum, however, the solutions delivered by the
ROMs hyper reduced using DEIM and UDEIM are found to be more accurate.
   Finally, Figure 6 reports for each considered hyper-reduction method the variation of the global
relative error of the ROM solution in the ´ direction with the global relative error committed off-
line. The obtained results suggest that, at least for this problem, ECSW can tolerate higher global
relative errors during its off-line phase than DEIM and UDEIM.
Remark 7
Figure 5 suggests that UDEIM is always faster than ECSW and, to some extent, DEIM. This is due
to the implementations of all three methods that were performed for the sole purpose of comparing
their numerical stability and accuracy properties. The performed implementation of UDEIM allows
the specification of the size of the reduced mesh directly. The performed implementation of ECSW
controls the size of the reduced mesh indirectly, via the tolerance " (24). Hence, for this comparison
study, ECSW always generated larger reduced meshes than DEIM and UDEIM. Given that for
this academic problem, the size of the HDM is very small (N D 1263 DOFs), the impact on
speedup of these different implementations is significant. For realistic HDMs and/or comparable
implementations of UDEIM, DEIM, and ECSW as far as control of the size of the reduced mesh,
the advantage of UDEIM exhibited here is not to be expected.

6.3. Fast spinning top in a gravitational field
Next, the simulation of the fast spinning of a hyperelastic aluminum top in a gravitational field is
considered. This problem was discussed first in [42] and then in [30]. The shape of the top is a
cone with height H D 0:1 m and radius R D 0:05 m. Its material has a density in the reference
configuration o D 2700 kg/m3 . It is modeled using the Saint Venant–Kirchhoff constitutive law,
which can be expressed as a linear relation between the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor and the
Green–Lagrange strain tensor. Hence, the internal forces are in this case nonlinear functions of the
nodal displacements due to the nonlinear kinematics (geometric nonlinearities). Young’s modulus
for this material is E D 80 GPa, and Poisson’s ratio is  D 0:33. The top is simply supported at its
apex. The gravitational acceleration, g D 9:81 m/s2 , generates an external body force that acts on
the top in the negative ´ direction (Figure 7).
   An undamped FE HDM is constructed for this problem using 4461 ten-noded tetrahedral elements
with three DOFs per node. Hence, the size of this HDM is N D 13;317 DOFs. The IVP in this
case is of the form (3). Initially, the top is set into the position obtained by a rigid-body rotation of

 3
   rad about the x-axis and the spinning motion about its axis with the convected angular velocity of
´ D 300 rad/s.
   In [30], model reduction for this problem was discussed in the context of an implicit time dis-
cretization, and hyper reduction was performed using ECSW only. In the interest of diversification,

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                1103




                                           Figure 7. Spinning top.

time discretization is performed here using the second-order accurate explicit central difference
method. For the HDM described earlier, the maximum stability time step of this explicit time inte-
grator is t D 1  107 s. Using this time step, the HDM-based simulation of the first 1 s of top
spinning consumes 21.8 h of wall time on 80 cores of the Linux cluster. The solution computed dur-
ing this simulation is sampled every s D 2103 s. All model III (hyper-reduced nonlinear ROM)
simulations are performed on a single core of the cluster—because for this problem, all generated
reduced meshes contain less than 35 elements (e.g., Table II)—using the same central difference
time integrator but a time step 20 times larger than the maximum stability time step for the HDM.
   Again, all three methods DEIM, UDEIM, and ECSW are applied to hyper reduce several ROMs
constructed for this problem using ROBs of different dimensions. Specifically, DEIM and UDEIM
are considered using different values of mU and AR and the full node and element selection
approaches. ECSW is considered with values of the global training tolerance " that produce reduced
meshes containing less than 1% of the original number of elements (Table II).
   For this problem, all hyper-reduced ROMs delivered by DEIM and UDEIM are found to be
numerically unstable (e.g., Figure 8). On the other hand, as anticipated by the theory presented in
this paper, all hyper-reduced ROMs delivered by ECSW for various values of the global training
tolerance are found to be numerically stable. Furthermore, Figure 9 and Table I show that all hyper-
reduced ROMs constructed using POD and ECSW deliver an excellent level of accuracy. Table II
shows that these ROMs also deliver impressive speedups, partly because of the very small sizes of
the hyper reduced meshes and partly because the hyper-reduced ROMs afford a stability time step
of the chosen explicit time integrator that is on average 20 times larger than its counterpart afforded
by the HDM.

6.4. Response of a car engine to thermal and combustion pressure loads
Finally, the versatility and robustness of ECSW is showcased on the FE simulation of the geo-
metrically nonlinear transient response of an engine to a cyclic thermal load. For this problem,
the constructed FE HDM is undamped and contains 275,685 solid, shell, and beam elements with
six DOFs per node and a total of N D 1;410;279 DOFs (Figure 10). The IVP in this case is of
the form (4). Temporal discretization is performed using the implicit generalized-˛ method with
t D 1:0  103 s. The response computed using this HDM is sampled every time step—that is,
using s D 1:0  103 s.
   For this industrial-size problem, all reduced meshes are constructed using the embarrassingly
parallel NNLS solver described in Section 3.3. Specifically, the dimension of the POD-based ROB

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                       Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                             DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                             10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1104                                 C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY




Figure 8. Unstable behavior of discrete empirical interpolation method (DEIM) and unassembled discrete
      empirical interpolation method (UDEIM). ECSW, energy-conserving sampling and weighting.




       Figure 9. Stable and accurate behavior of energy-conserving sampling and weighting (ECSW).



                     Table I. Fast spinning top problem: accuracy delivered by the
                     reduced-order models hyper reduced using energy-conserving
                                         sampling and weighting.

                       n     REx       REy     RE´      REvelx   REvely    REvel´

                       9    0.012     0.0099   0.014     0.28     0.31      0.17
                       10   0.010     0.0083   0.012     0.24     0.26      0.16
                       15   0.0078    0.0064   0.0091    0.12     0.13      0.092


Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                    Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                               10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                               1105

                        Table II. Fast spinning top problem: reduced meshes gen-
                        erated by the sequential non-negative least-squares solver
                        and speedup factors enabled by energy-conserving sampling
                                              and weighting.

                         n         Reduced mesh (no. of elements)          SIII

                         9                      12                     9:25  103
                         10                     15                     7:66  103
                         15                     34                     3:21  103




Figure 10. Finite element model of a complete car engine (three specific nodes of the mesh are marked
                                           for reference).


                        Table III. Engine problem: reduced meshes generated by the
                        parallel non-negative least-squares solver and speedup fac-
                        tors enabled by energy-conserving sampling and weighting.

                         Ns        Reduced mesh (no. of elements)          SIII

                         30                     859                    1:05  104
                         43                    1332                    5:43  103
                         62                    1884                    3:33  103
                         79                    2414                    2:50  103


is fixed to n D 100, the global training tolerance is set to " D 1  104 , and four different arbitrary
numbers of subdomains Ns are considered: 30, 43, 62, and 79. The sizes of these reduced meshes
are reported in Table III. Two of them are also graphically depicted in Figure 11. The reader can
observe that the size of the reduced mesh increases roughly linearly with Ns .
   Figure 12 highlights the merits of the parallel, subdomain-based formulation of the NNLS solver.
Specifically, the left part of this figure shows that increasing the number of subdomains Ns and the
number of cores accordingly decreases the wall time needed for constructing the reduced mesh. For
30 6 Ns 6 62, the subdomain-based NNLS solver delivers in this case a parallel efficiency of
roughly 110%. However, for Ns > 62, this subdomain-based solver does not achieve any speedup,
despite the fact that its implementation is embarrassingly parallel. This suggests that the balancing

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                      Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                            DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                              10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1106                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY




Figure 11. Reduced meshes generated by the parallel non-negative least-squares solver using " D 104 ,
                                Ns D 30 (left) and Ns D 79 (right).




  Figure 12. Performance results of the parallel non-negative least-squares algorithm for " D 1  104 .


approach (26) for setting the value of the local training tolerance "i alone does not effectively address
the load unbalance in the parallel NNLS computations. Furthermore, the right part of Figure 12
shows that for all considered values of Ns , the solution vector   delivered by the parallel sparse
NNLS solver satisfies the convergence criterion (24) with a value of the global training tolerance 10
times lower than the specified value of " D 104 . This is consistent with the theoretical bound (27).
   The HDM simulation is performed on 79 cores of the Linux cluster using the parallel FETI-DP
iterative solver [43–45]. It is completed in 2:61  104 s wall time and therefore consumes 2:06 
106 s of aggregate CPU time. All hyper-reduced ROM simulations are executed on a single core of
the same cluster using the same implicit time integrator and same time step t D 1:0  103 s.
A model II solution is also computed to assist in the error analysis of the model III solution—
that is, in determining to which extent the error in the solution computed using the hyper-reduced
nonlinear ROM is due to the subspace approximation inherent to model II versus the hyper-reduction
approximation inherent to model III.
   Figure 13 shows displacement time histories predicted using the HDM and the counterpart ROM
and hyper-reduced ROMs at all three nodes of the FE model marked in Figure 10, for all considered
values of the number of subdomains Ns . Tables IV and V report the model III global relative errors
for all displacement and rotational DOFs at these nodes and all corresponding velocities and angular
velocities, and all considered values of Ns . Table III reports the achieved speedup factor as a function
of Ns and the size of the reduced mesh. From all these results, it follows that the accuracy of the

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                     Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                             10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
            ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                             1107




Figure 13. Computed displacements at three different nodes and directions using models I and II and
three different energy-conserving sampling and weighting model IIIs corresponding to three different
                                           mesh partitions.


         Table IV. Engine problem: accuracy delivered by the reduced-order models hyper reduced
             using energy-conserving sampling and weighting—displacements and rotations.

          Ns         REx          REy        RE´          RErotx         REroty         RErot´

          30         1.02          7.66      13.91         7.87           1.69            0.88
          43         0.97          7.63      13.09         7.88           1.71            0.82
          62         1.07          7.56      13.55         7.86           1.66            0.76
          79         1.05          7.54      13.31         7.80           1.68            0.75


         Table V. Engine problem: accuracy delivered by the reduced-order models hyper reduced
           using energy-conserving sampling and weighting—velocities and angular velocities.

          Ns      REvelx        REvely     REvel´     REangvelx      REangvely       REangvel´
          30       4.01          8.20      15.06        8.12           2.72            3.15
          43       3.97          8.17      14.40        8.14           2.73            3.04
          62       3.92          8.09      14.64        8.08           2.74            3.03
          79       3.93          8.06      14.44        8.01           2.64            3.00


ROMs hyper reduced by ECSW is almost insensitive to both the considered number of subdomains
and the resulting number of elements in the reduced mesh. Indeed, for all considered values of
Ns , the solutions computed using the hyper-reduced ROMs are found to be tainted by almost the
same relative errors. These range between 1% for the displacement in the x direction and 15% for
the velocity in the ´ direction. Furthermore, Figure 13 (node 460862 ´-displacement) reveals that
these errors are due primarily to the subspace approximation associated with model II and not to

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                    Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                             10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1108                                C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


the ECSW hyper reduction. On the other hand, the CPU performance of these ROMs is found to be
sensitive to the number of subdomains. Essentially, this is because, as noted earlier, the size of the
reduced mesh delivered by the subdomain-based parallel NNLS solver increases in this case roughly
linearly with Ns . Specifically, the hyper-reduced ROMs are found to reduce the CPU time consumed
by the HDM simulation by a factor ranging between 2500 and 10,500. This performance variation
with the size of the reduced mesh suggests that at least for n D 100, the CPU cost of the implicit
ROM computations is dominated by the CPU cost associated with performing the hyper-reduction
step (Equations (18)), and not by the factorization cost of the reduced dynamic tangent stiffness
matrix whose size is constant and equal to n. Nevertheless, whichever number of subdomains is
considered, the corresponding speedup factor is simply impressive.

                                           7. CONCLUSIONS

A hyper-reduction scheme is critical for the performance of a nonlinear ROM. It enables it to have a
computational complexity that scales with its small size and therefore to deliver the desired speedup
factor. Most hyper-reduction schemes are related and differ primarily in their details and level of
theoretical support. They share the idea of approximating a nonlinear function defined over a large-
scale computational mesh by interpolating it at a few nodes of this mesh using a set of empirically
derived basis functions. The EIM and its discrete variant known as the DEIM are perhaps among
the most popular hyper-reduction schemes. They have been applied primarily to ROMs emanating
from parabolic and first-order hyperbolic problems. The UDEIM is a recently introduced variant
of DEIM that is tailored for FE computations. It has been successfully applied to the hyper reduc-
tion of a limited number of mildly nonlinear FE dynamic ROMs of solids and structures. These
emanate from second-order hyperbolic problems. The ECSW method is another recently introduced
hyper-reduction scheme that is tailored specifically to FE ROMs of second-order dynamical sys-
tems. Unlike all aforementioned alternatives, it does not approximate a nonlinear function of interest
directly, let alone interpolate it at a few spatial locations using empirically derived basis functions.
Instead, ECSW samples a given FE mesh and constructs a reduced version of it. It attributes to
each sampled element a weighting coefficient. It computes these coefficients off-line using a sparse
NNLS solver so that the work performed on the reduced mesh by a set of training force functions
along a set of conjugate displacement functions matches its counterpart performed on the original
mesh. It approximates online the scalar projections of a nonlinear function of interest onto a ROB
by evaluating this projection on the reduced mesh using the pre-computed weights. In this paper, it
is proven that ECSW distinguishes itself furthermore from other hyper-reduction schemes through
its preservation of the Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s principle. Consequently,
unlike DEIM and UDEIM, ECSW also preserves the numerical stability properties of a discrete
reduced-order second-order dynamical system to which it is applied. For this reason, for all discrete
nonlinear FE dynamic ROMs of solids and structures considered in this paper, ECSW delivered
numerically stable hyper-reduced counterparts, but for many of these, DEIM and UDEIM failed to
do so. Two other major results established in this paper are as follows. First, the error committed
online by ECSW in the case of a fixed set of parameter values is bounded by its counterpart error
committed off-line during the training phase. Therefore, this error can be estimated a priori and
controlled. Second, the embarrassingly parallel application of the sparse NNLS solver at the subdo-
main level speeds up significantly the off-line computation of the ECSW weights. It also leads to
hyper-reduced ROMs whose accuracy is almost insensitive to the number of subdomains and size of
the reduced mesh. Finally, for a nonlinear transient dynamic analysis of a complete car engine con-
sidered in this paper using an implicit scheme, ECSW is reported to reduce the CPU time required
by the high-dimensional nonlinear FE dynamic model by more than four orders of magnitude, while
achieving a good level of accuracy.

                                           ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The first and third authors acknowledge partial support by the Army Research Laboratory through the
Army High Performance Computing Research Center under Cooperative Agreement W911NF-07-2-0027

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                    Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                           10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             ECSW FOR THE HYPER REDUCTION OF NONLINEAR FE DYNAMIC MODELS                                         1109

and partial support by the Office of Naval Research under grant N00014-11-1-0707. The second author
acknowledges the support by a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship. All authors
thank Dr. David Amsallem for several helpful comments and suggestions. The content of this publication
does not necessarily reflect the position or policy of any of the aforementioned institutions, and no official
endorsement should be inferred.


                                                     REFERENCES
 1. Lieu T, Farhat C, Lesoinne M. Reduced-order fluid/structure modeling of a complete aircraft configuration. Computer
    Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 2006; 195(41–43):5730–5742.
 2. Amsallem D, Cortial J, Farhat C. Toward real-time CFD-based aeroelastic computations using a database of reduced-
    order information. AIAA Journal 2010; 48(9):2029–2037.
 3. Carlberg K, Farhat C. A low-cost, goal-oriented compact proper orthogonal decomposition basis for model reduction
    of static systems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2011; 86(3):381–402.
 4. Sirovich L. Turbulence and the dynamics of coherent structures. I-coherent structures. Quarterly of Applied
    Mathematics 1987; 45:561–571.
 5. Prud’homme C, Rovas D, Veroy K, Machiels L, Maday Y, Patera A, Turinici G. Reliable real-time solution of
    parametrized partial differential equations: reduced-basis output bound methods. Journal of Fluids Engineering—
    Transactions of the ASME 2002; 124(1):70–80.
 6. Amsallem D, Zahr MJ, Farhat C. Nonlinear model order reduction based on local reduced-order bases. International
    Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2012; 92(10):891–916.
 7. Washabaugh K, Amsallem D, Zahr MJ, Farhat C. Nonlinear model reduction for CFD problems using local reduced
    order bases. AIAA-2012-2686, 42nd AIAA Fluid Dynamics Conference and Exhibit, New Orleans, Louisiana, June
    25.
 8. LeGresley PA, Alonso JJ. Airfoil design optimization using reduced order models based on proper orthogonal
    decomposition. AIAA Paper 2000-2545, Fluids 2000 Conference and Exhibit, Denver, Colorado, June 19.
 9. Bui-Thanh T, Willcox K, Ghattas O. Parametric reduced-order models for probabilistic analysis of unsteady
    aerodynamic applications. AIAA Journal 2008; 46(10):2520–2529.
10. Carlberg K, Bou-Mosleh C, Farhat C. Efficient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares Petrov–Galerkin pro-
    jection and compressive tensor approximations. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2011;
    86(2):155–181.
11. Carlberg K, Farhat C, Cortial J, Amsallem D. The GNAT method for nonlinear model reduction: effective implemen-
    tation and application to computational fluid dynamics and turbulent flows. Journal of Computational Physics 2013;
    242:623–647.
12. Amsallem D, Farhat C. On the stability of projection-based linear reduced-order models: descriptor vs non-descriptor
    forms. In Reduced order Methods for Modeling and Computational Reduction. Springer MS & A Series, 2014;
    215–234.
13. Amsallem D, Farhat C, Zahr M. On the robustness of residual minimization for constructing pod-based reduced-order
    CFD models. AIAA-2013-2447, 43rd AIAA Fluid Dynamics Conference and Exhibit, San Diego, CA, June 26.
14. Barbič J, James DL. Real-time subspace integration for St. Venant–Kirchhoff deformable models. ACM Transactions
    on Graphics (TOG) 2005; 24(3):982–990.
15. Ryckelynck D. A priori hyperreduction method: an adaptive approach. Journal of Computational Physics 2005;
    202:346–366.
16. Everson R, Sirovich L. Karhunen–Loeve procedure for gappy data. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 1995;
    12(8):1657–1664.
17. Bui-Thanh T, Murali D, Willcox K. Proper orthogonal decomposition extensions for parametric applications in com-
    pressible aerodynamics. AIAA Paper 2003-4213, 21st Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Orlando, Florida, June
    23.
18. Venturi D, Karniadakis G. Gappy data and reconstruction procedures for flow past a cylinder. Journal of Fluid
    Mechanics 2004; 519:315–336.
19. Astrid P, Weiland S, Willcox K, Backx T. Missing point estimation in models described by proper orthogonal
    decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 2008; 53(10):2237–2251.
20. Grepl MA, Maday Y, Nguyen NC, Patera A. Efficient reduced-basis treatment of nonaffine and nonlinear partial
    differential equations. ESAIM: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Analysis 2007; 41(03):575–605.
21. Nguyen N, Peraire J. An efficient reduced-order modeling approach for non-linear parametrized partial differential
    equations. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2008; 76(1):27–55.
22. Astrid P. Reduction of process simulation models: a proper orthogonal decomposition approach. Technische
    Universiteit Eindhoven: Eindhoven, Netherlands, 2004.
23. Astrid P, Weiland S, Willcox K, Backx T. Missing point estimation in models described by proper orthogonal
    decomposition. Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on 2008; 53(10):2237–2251.
24. Chaturantabut S, Sorensen DC. Discrete empirical interpolation for nonlinear model reduction. Proceedings of the
    48th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Held Jointly with the 28th Chinese Control Conference, Shanghai,
    China, December 16; 4316–4321.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                             Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/nme
                                                                                                                            10970207, 2015, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.4820 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1110                                    C. FARHAT, T. CHAPMAN AND P. AVERY


25. Galbally D, Fidkowski K, Willcox K, Ghattas O. Non-linear model reduction for uncertainty quantification in large-
    scale inverse problems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2010; 81(12):1581–1608.
26. Chaturantabut S, Sorensen DC. Nonlinear model reduction via discrete empirical interpolation. SIAM Journal on
    Scientific and Statistical Computing 2010; 32(5):2737–2764.
27. Tiso P, Rixen DJ. Discrete empirical interpolation method for finite element structural dynamics. Topics in Nonlinear
    Dynamics 2013; 1:203–212.
28. Carlberg K, Tuminaro R, Boggs P. Efficient structure-preserving model reduction for nonlinear mechanical sys-
    tems with application to structural dynamics. 53rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics
    and Materials Conference, AIAA, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2012; AIAA–Paper.
29. Farhat C, Cortial J, Chapman T. A hyper-reduction method for nonlinear structural dynamics reduced-order models.
    Tenth World Congress on Computational Mechanics (WCCM X), vol. Book of Abstracts, Sao Paolo, Brazil, 2012.
30. Farhat C, Avery P, Chapman T, Cortial J. Dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models with
    finite rotations and energy-based mesh sampling and weighting for computational efficiency. International Journal
    for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2014; 98(9):625–662.
31. An SS, Kim T, James DL. Optimizing cubature for efficient integration of subspace deformations. ACM Transactions
    on Graphics 2008; 27(5):165.
32. Marsden JE, Ratiu TS. Introduction to Mechanics and Symmetry: A Basic Exposition of Classical Mechanical
    Systems, Vol. 17. Springer: New York, NY, 1999.
33. Farhat C, Lesoinne M, LeTallec P. Load and motion transfer algorithms for fluid/structure interaction problems
    with non-matching discrete interfaces: momentum and energy conservation, optimal discretization and application to
    aeroelasticity. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 1998; 157(1-2):95–114.
34. Amaldi E, Kann V. On the approximability of minimizing nonzero variables or unsatisfied relations in linear systems.
    Theoretical Computer Science 1998; 209(1):237–260.
35. Lawson CL, Hanson RJ. Solving Least Squares Problems, Vol. 161. SIAM: Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-hall,
    1974.
36. Krysl P, Lall S, Marsden J. Dimensional model reduction in non-linear finite element dynamics of solids and
    structures. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2001; 51(4):479–504.
37. Farhat C, Geuzaine P, Brown G. Application of a three-field nonlinear fluid–structure formulation to the prediction
    of the aeroelastic parameters of an F-16 fighter. Computers and Fluids 2003; 32:3–29.
38. Geuzaine P, Brown G, Harris C, Farhat C. Aeroelastic dynamic analysis of a full F-16 configuration for various flight
    conditions. AIAA Journal 2003; 41:363–371.
39. Paul-Dubois-Taine A, Amsallem D. An adaptive and efficient greedy procedure for the optimal training of para-
    metric reduced-order models. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2014. (submitted for
    publication).
40. Farhat C. A simple and efficient automatic FEM domain decomposer. Computers and Structures 1988; 28(5):
    579–602.
41. Farhat C, Lantéri S, Simon HD. TOP/DOMDEC, a software tool for mesh partitioning and parallel processing.
    Journal of Computing Systems in Engineering 1995; 6(1):13–26.
42. Nielsen MB, Krenk S. Conservative integration of rigid body motion by quaternion parameters with implicit
    constraints. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2012; 92(8):734–752.
43. Farhat C, Lesoinne M, Pierson K. A scalable dual-primal domain decomposition method. Numerical Linear Algebra
    with Applications 2000; 7:687–714.
44. Farhat C, Lesoinne M, LeTallec P, Pierson K, Rixen D. FETI-DP: a dual-primal unified FETI method—part I: a
    faster alternative to the two-level FETI method. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 2001;
    50:1523–1544.
45. Farhat C, Roux F. A method of finite element tearing and interconnecting and its parallel solution algorithm.
    International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 1991; 32:1205–1227.




Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                              Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 2015; 102:1077–1110
                                                                                                    DOI: 10.1002/nme
