Received: 6 August 2020    Revised: 5 December 2020   Accepted: 6 December 2020

DOI: 10.1002/nme.6603


RESEARCH ARTICLE




Mesh sampling and weighting for the hyperreduction of
nonlinear Petrov–Galerkin reduced-order models with local
reduced-order bases

Sebastian Grimberg1                       Charbel Farhat1,2,3                     Radek Tezaur1            Charbel Bou-Mosleh4

1
  Department of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Stanford University,                Abstract
Stanford, California, USA                         The energy-conserving sampling and weighting (ECSW) method is a
2
  Department of Mechanical Engineering,           hyper-reduction method originally developed for accelerating the performance
Stanford University, Stanford, California,
                                                  of Galerkin projection-based reduced-order models (PROMs) associated with
USA
3
 Institute for Computational and
                                                  large-scale finite element models, when the underlying projected operators need
Mathematical Engineering, Stanford                to be frequently recomputed as in parametric and/or nonlinear problems. In
University, Stanford, California, USA             this paper, this hyper-reduction method is extended to Petrov–Galerkin PROMs
4
 Department of Mechanical Engineering,
                                                  where the underlying high-dimensional models can be associated with arbitrary
Notre Dame University-Louaize, Zouk
Mosbeh, Lebanon                                   finite element, finite volume, and finite difference semi-discretization meth-
                                                  ods. Its scope is also extended to cover local PROMs based on piecewise-affine
Correspondence
                                                  approximation subspaces, such as those designed for mitigating the Kolmogorov
Sebastian Grimberg, Department of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford            n-width barrier issue associated with convection-dominated flow problems.
University, Durand Building, 496 Lomita           The resulting ECSW method is shown in this paper to be robust and accurate.
Mall, Stanford, CA 94305-4035.
Email: sjg@stanford.edu
                                                  In particular, its offline phase is shown to be fast and parallelizable, and the
                                                  potential of its online phase for large-scale applications of industrial relevance
Funding information                               is demonstrated for turbulent flow problems with O(107 ) and O(108 ) degrees
Air Force Office of Scientific Research,
Grant/Award Number: FA9550-17-1-0182;             of freedom. For such problems, the online part of the ECSW method proposed
Boeing, Grant/Award Number: 45047;                in this paper for Petrov–Galerkin PROMs is shown to enable wall-clock time
King Abdulaziz City for Science and
                                                  and CPU time speedup factors of several orders of magnitude while delivering
Technology (KACST); Office of Naval
Research, Grant/Award Number:                     exceptional accuracy.
N00014-17-1-2749
                                                  KEYWORDS
                                                  hyper-reduction, local basis, machine learning, nonlinear model reduction, Petrov–Galerkin,
                                                  reduced mesh




1         I N T RO DU CT ION

Projection-based model order reduction (PMOR) is an enabling computational technology for dramatically reducing
the solution time and storage requirements associated with the analysis of high-fidelity, high-dimensional (large-scale),
differential-equation-based computational models in various parametric settings. Time-critical applications requiring
real-time, near real-time, or simply faster than ever performance such as computational-based design and optimization,
statistical analysis, and optimal control stand to benefit from the reduced computational complexity of the outcome of
PMOR—that is, from projection-based reduced-order models (PROMs). Unfortunately, the computational cost associated

1846     © 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                          wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/nme         Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2021;122:1846–1874.
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                        1847




                                                                                                                              10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
with the construction of a PROM of dimension n—and more specifically, the underlying projected vectors and matri-
ces (a.k.a. the reduced-order vectors and matrices)—typically scales with both n and the dimension of the underlying
high-dimensional computational model (HDM) N ≫ n. Thus, unless this issue is mitigated, a typical PMOR method does
not necessarily deliver the expected speedup factor.
    A popular approach for addressing the aforementioned scaling issue is to decompose the computation of projected
vectors and matrices in two parts: one whose computational complexity scales with the dimension of the HDM but can be
executed offline to precompute once-for-all some numerical quantities—that is, before the parametric or repetitive PROM
computations are performed; and another part which exploits the aforementioned precomputed quantities to perform all
online computations with a complexity that is independent of the large dimension of the HDM. This offline–online decom-
position has been extensively demonstrated for parametric, linear problems,1,2 and for nonlinear problems exhibiting a
low-order polynomial dependence on the chosen degrees of freedom (DOFs).3-5 For some HDMs with nonpolynomial
nonlinearities, lifting transformations have been advocated to enable the offline–online decomposition approach asso-
ciated with low-order polynomial nonlinearities.6 However, for highly nonlinear HDMs, such transformations are in
general computationally intractable, in which case the aforementioned offline–online decomposition is simply not an
option.
    Alternatively, a computational approach known as hyper-reduction has gained wide acceptance for eliminating
the computational bottlenecks associated with the repeated re-evaluations of parametric reduced-order vectors and
matrices. A comprehensive review of this approach, which is equally applicable to linear and arbitrarily nonlin-
ear parametric PROMs, can be found in Reference 7. Generally speaking, hyper-reduction introduces in the con-
struction of a PROM an additional approximation layer that enables the efficient computation of the projected,
low-dimensional vectors and matrices defining a PROM without sacrificing the desired level of accuracy. Specifically,
the computational complexity of the processing of a PROM after it is hyper-reduced is independent of the size of the
underlying HDM.
    Hyper-reduction methods can be classified in two types:7 approximate-then-project methods, which were developed
first and have a longer record of successful applications; and project-then-approximate methods, which have been pro-
posed more recently and are more robust. The origins of approximate-then-project hyper-reduction methods can be traced
back to the gappy proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) method8 developed in the context of image reconstruction. As
their label implies, such methods approximate first a nonlinear high-dimensional quantity—for example, by interpolat-
ing information at a carefully selected subset of the nodes of a computational mesh using a small number of empirically
derived basis functions—then compute the exact projection of the approximation onto the left reduced-order basis (ROB)
underlying the PROM of interest. The first examples of this type of hyper-reduction methods include the empirical inter-
polation method (EIM)9,10 and the related best points interpolation method,11 which are derived at the continuous level
and enjoy some level of theoretical support for elliptic problems. Variant approaches based on function sampling have
also been proposed, including the missing point estimation method12 and the collocation method.13,14 In this first type
of hyper-reduction methods, however, the discrete empirical interpolation method (DEIM),15 which can be viewed as a
variant of the discrete form of the aforementioned EIM, is certainly the most popular method: it has seen widespread
adoption along with subsequent adaptations.16,17
    Hyper-reduction methods of the project-then-approximate type differ from their predecessors by directly approxi-
mating the reduced-order vectors and matrices associated with the projection of HDM quantities onto the left ROB
associated with the PROM of interest. As such, they seek to achieve a better approximation of the PROM than
approximate-then-project hyper-reduction methods. They can be interpreted as generalized quadrature rules in which
the set of quadrature “points” and associated weights are learned in a supervised procedure on an empirical set of training
data, which illustrates one of the many connections between PMOR and machine learning. The earliest hyper-reduction
methods of this type include the cubature-based approach of Reference 18 and the energy-conserving sampling and
weighting (ECSW) method.19 More recent examples include the empirical cubature method (ECM)20 and the linear
program-based empirical quadrature method.21 All such methods compute a reduced mesh—that is, a subset of the
elements or other entities of the computational mesh underlying the given HDM—whose entities define the quadra-
ture points. In this sense, all hyper-reduction methods of the project-then-approximate type perform mesh sampling.
Among such methods, ECSW distinguishes itself from alternatives in that for second-order hyperbolic problems such as
structural dynamics and wave propagation problems, it preserves the Lagrangian structure associated with Hamilton’s
principle.22 As such, if a time-integrator applied to a second-order hyperbolic PROM is provably unconditionally sta-
ble, it is guaranteed that this time-integrator will remain numerically stable on the hyper-reduced counterpart PROM
(HPROM) produced by ECSW. In particular, it has been shown that ECSW leads to numerically stable and accurate
1848                                                                                                         GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                               10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HPROMs when applied to realistic structural dynamics problems for which state-of-the-art hyper-reduction methods of
the approximate-then-project type fail to do so.22
    All hyper-reduction methods of both types outlined above have been developed in the context of Galerkin PMOR
methods—that is, PMOR methods where the left and right ROBs are identical, or equivalently, the subspaces of the test
and approximation functions are the same. Only two of them have been explored for the acceleration of Petrov–Galerkin
(PG) PMOR methods—that is, PMOR methods where the left and right ROBs differ. Both of these methods are of the
approximate-then-project type: a gappy-POD-like method that is similar to DEIM, was developed for the Gauss–Newton
with approximated tensors (GNAT) PMOR method,23,24 and is referred to in the remainder of this paper as the the
gappy-POD-based GNAT method; and a least-squares variant of the collocation approach13 that was first explored
in Reference 25; then tailored in References 26,27 for PG PROMs in computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Further-
more, hyper-reduction methods of the project-than-approximate type have been developed so far only for second-order
hyperbolic problems semi-discretized by a finite element (FE) method.
    Yet, the PMOR of many parametric, nonlinear HDMs including those for which the tangent matrices are nonsym-
metric calls for PG-based reduction methods. For example, it was recently shown in Reference 28 that the real culprit
behind most if not all numerical instabilities reported in the literature for PROMs of convection-dominated laminar and
turbulent flows is the Galerkin framework used for constructing such PROMs; and that alternatively, numerically stable
and accurate PROMs for such laminar and turbulent flows can be constructed using a PG framework without resorting
to additional closure models or tailoring of the subspace of approximation. However, it was also shown in Reference 27
that PG HPROMs of convection-dominated flows constructed using the two aforementioned hyper-reduction methods of
the approximate-than-project type at best deliver a problem-dependent performance and at worst perform poorly when
applied outside of their training data. Furthermore, the mesh reduction algorithms underlying all hyper-reduction meth-
ods of the approximate-then-project type are based on suboptimal greedy sampling procedures that require as input the
size of the reduced mesh—which is unknown a priori—thereby hindering practicality for many applications.
    For all reasons summarized above, it remains to develop for nonlinear PG PROMs a reliable and practical
hyper-reduction method of the project-then-approximate type that is applicable to first-order hyperbolic problems
semi-discretized by any preferred technique. This paper focuses on filling this gap. Specifically, it presents an ECSW-type
method for the hyper-reduction of PG PROMs where the underlying HDMs arise from the semi-discretization
of first-order hyperbolic problems by any preferred scheme. It emphasizes CFD applications associated with
convection-dominated viscous flows for the following reasons:

• They are prime candidates for PG-based PMOR.
• At high Reynolds numbers, they entail very large-scale meshes that are occasionally perceived to challenge the com-
  putational tractability of hyper-reduction methods or their fidelity6 and therefore are excellent candidates for assessing
  their sheer wall-clock time performance and accuracy.
• Due to the large Kolmogorov n-width29 of the solution manifold associated with their HDMs, the PMOR of such appli-
  cations typically requires the construction of multiple local, piecewise-affine subspace approximations instead of a
  single global approximation,17,30 which raises the issue of how to perform hyper-reduction in this case.

    To this end, the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the context is set to the PG-based
PMOR of nonlinear, first-order dynamical systems using local subspace approximations. The computational bottlenecks
are overviewed in order to motivate the concept of hyper-reduction. In Section 3, the ECSW hyper-reduction method
previously developed for Galerkin PROMs of HDMs associated with FE-based approximations of second-order dynam-
ical systems is generalized to PG PROMs of HDMs constructed using any preferred semi-discretizations of first-order
dynamical systems. In Section 4, first the ECSW mesh sampling procedure is reviewed along with the parallel computa-
tional kernels required for minimizing the offline wall-clock time for very large-scale problems. Next, a comprehensive
approach for constructing the reduced mesh resulting from the aforementioned sampling procedure is described. This
approach covers many popular spatial discretization methods. In Section 5, the generalized ECSW method is applied
to the hyper-reduction of three PG PROMs associated with convection-dominated, viscous flow problems: an academic,
unsteady, laminar flow problem that is easy to reproduce by the interested reader; an unsteady wake flow problem asso-
ciated with the geometry of the so-called Ahmed body;31 and a very large-scale turbulent flow problem with O(108 )
unknowns associated with an F-16C/D Block 40 aircraft configuration with external stores at a high angle of attack. The
latter application is chosen to demonstrate both the computational tractability of the proposed ECSW hyper-reduction
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                         1849




                                                                                                                               10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
method and its accuracy for a challenging, very large-scale application. Performance comparisons between the proposed
hyper-reduction method, the gappy-POD-based GNAT alternative,23,24 and the least-squares collocation hyper-reduction
method25 equipped with the mesh sampling algorithm of the GNAT method are also presented for the first application.
Finally, conclusions are offered in Section 6.


2     NONLINEAR PET ROV–GA LERKIN PROJECTION-BASED MODEL
O R D E R R E DU CT ION BASE D O N LOCAL REDUC ED- ORDER BASES

2.1        Local subspace approximation and Petrov–Galerkin projection

Here, the focus is set on the first-order, 𝝁-parametric, N-dimensional, highly nonlinear, semi-discrete problem

                                                   ̇ 𝝁) + f(u(t; 𝝁); 𝝁) = g(t; 𝝁)
                                               M(𝝁)u(t;
                                                                    u(0; 𝝁) = u0 (𝝁),                                    (1)

where t ∈ [0, T f ] denotes time, the dot denotes the derivative with respect to time, 𝝁 ∈  ⊂ Rp is a p-dimensional vector
of parameters,  denotes the bounded parameter space of interest, u(t; 𝝁) ∈ RN is the time-dependent solution vector,
and u0 (𝝁) ∈ RN is its initial condition. Throughout this paper, M(𝝁) ∈ RN×N is a parametric mass matrix and is rea-
sonably assumed to be symmetric positive definite (SPD), f(u(t; 𝝁); 𝝁) ∈ RN is a nonlinear function resulting from the
semi-discretization of the partial differential equation (PDE) of interest and referred to as the nonlinear flux vector, and
g(t; 𝝁) ∈ RN is a time-dependent, parametric, source term vector that may or may not be zero depending on the appli-
cation. The HDM problem (1) can represent the semi-discretization by any preferred approximation technique of a PDE
with arbitrary order temporal derivatives—given that higher-order ordinary differential equations can be rewritten in
first-order form by expanding the vector of DOFs u(t; 𝝁). However, all numerical examples discussed in this paper pertain
to first-order systems of conservation laws.
    Following Reference 32, the solution manifold associated with the above HDM-based problem—which is assumed
to be highly nonlinear—is approximated here in the time and parameters domain of interest by a collection of
N c piecewise-affine subspaces of RN . The dimension of each kth affine subspace is denoted by nk , with nk ≪ N
∀k ∈ {1, … , N c }. The local approximation based on the kth approximation subspace is written as

                                        u(t; 𝝁) ≈ uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁) ∀(t, 𝝁) ∈ [0, Tf ] × ,                            (2)

where uo,k ∈ RN is a fixed vector defining an affine offset of the kth local subspace represented by the right ROB Vk ∈
RN×nk and yk (t; 𝝁) ∈ Rnk is the vector of reduced (or generalized) coordinates of the representation of the solution in
the kth local approximation subspace. Throughout the remainder of this paper, each right ROB Vk is assumed to be
orthonormal—that is, ∀k, VTk Vk = I, where the superscript T denotes the transpose operation.
    For the sake of completeness and in order to keep this paper as self-contained as possible, the construction of the N c
local subspaces and the online selection for a queried (time, parameter) instance (t, 𝝁) of the local approximation subspace
are discussed in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, respectively. The concept of approximating the HDM-based solution manifold using
a collection of local affine subspaces is illustrated in Figure 1.




FIGURE 1          Approximation of the high-dimensional computational
model-based solution manifold, , in the time and parameter domain of
interest by piecewise-affine subspaces with N c = 3
1850                                                                                                                    GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                          10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
       The HDM-based problem (1) can be rewritten in residual form as follows

                                          ̇ 𝝁), t; 𝝁) = M(𝝁)u(t;
                               r(u(t; 𝝁), u(t;              ̇ 𝝁) + f(u(t; 𝝁); 𝝁) − g(t; 𝝁) = 0.                                    (3)

Substituting (2) into (3) and projecting the resulting overdetermined nonlinear system of equations onto the left subspace
defined by the left ROB Wk ∈ RN×nk , k = 1, … , N c , yields an implicit database of N c local nonlinear PG PROMs asso-
ciated with the underlying HDM (3). Here, the word implicit is used to specify that the N c local nonlinear PG PROMs
are not precomputed and stored in the database; they are constructed online using the underlying local ROBs which are
precomputed and stored in the database. Each local, nonlinear PG PROM-based problem can be written as

                            rk (yk (t; 𝝁), ẏ k (t; 𝝁), t; 𝝁) = WTk r(uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁), Vk ẏ k (t; 𝝁), t; 𝝁) = 0,              (4)

where rk (yk (t; 𝝁), ẏ k (t; 𝝁), t; 𝝁) ∈ Rnk .
    For many applications, it has been shown that using a PG projection instead of a Galerkin one, where Wk = Vk ∀k, to
construct a PROM of the form given in (4) endows the PROM with superior numerical stability and accuracy properties.
For example for steady-state linear problems, PG projection has been advocated to guarantee the asymptotic stability of
the resulting PROM by bounding the approximation error.33 For time-dependent linear problems, PG projection has been
proposed to guarantee that the resulting linear PROM satisfies the Lyapunov stability criterion.30 For nonlinear problems,
it was shown that a for a specific class of PG projections associated with a specific method for constructing a left ROB
Wk , the resulting PROMs produce solutions that minimize the time-discrete nonlinear HDM-based residual over the
affine approximation subspace, even when the HDM is characterized by non-SPD tangent matrices28 —a condition which
typically destroys the optimal properties of a Galerkin projection.


2.2          Construction of a piecewise-affine local subspace of approximation

Several methods have been proposed for constructing the local approximation subspace (2). All of them rely on partition-
                                                           Ns
ing the collected set of N s training snapshots  = {u(s) }s=1 , where u(s) = um (𝝁q ) is a discrete approximation of u(tm ; 𝜇q ),
t ∈ [0, T f ], and 𝝁 ∈ . However, these methods differ by how they specifically partition  into subsets of solution snap-
 m                  q

shots. For example, snapshot partitioning has been performed by simply partitioning the time34 or parameter35,36 domain.
Alternatively, state space (or HDM-based solution manifold) partitioning has been advocated and realized by clustering
and compressing the solution snapshots:32 this enables the construction of local, nonlinear PROMs capable of capturing
the different regimes and features (e.g., discontinuities and fronts) that may be experienced by the solution of an HDM
such as (1),32 as well as capturing the effects on this solution of variations in the parameters of such an HDM.37 All of
these approaches accommodate the hyperreduction process.
    In this work, all local subspace approximations of the form (2) are performed by partitioning the state space (or solu-
tion manifold) as first proposed in Reference 32. For this purpose, the collected solution snapshots are first divided into
                                                       ⋃Nc                    ⋂
N c nonoverlapping clusters k , k = 1, … , N c , where k=1   k =  and k l = ∅ ∀k ≠ l, using the k-means algorithm38
equipped with the standard Euclidean distance in the state space. Then, the postprocessing procedure summarized in
Algorithm 137 is applied to introduce some amount of overlap between the generated clusters to promote the continuity
                                                                                                             Nc
of the approximation in the transitional regions. The modified snapshot clusters are denoted by {k+ }k=1       . Next, for each
affine subspace approximation, the affine offset uo,k is specified—for example, as the problem initial condition u0 (𝝁) or
the cluster centroid uc,k defined here as follows

                                                             Ns,k
                                                       1 ∑ (s,k)
                                               uc,k =          u ,             k = 1, … , Nc ,
                                                      Ns,k s=1

where u(s,k) denotes a generic training snapshot u(s) assigned to the kth cluster and N s, k denotes the total number of
training snapshots assigned to this cluster. Finally, each right ROB Vk appearing in (2) is constructed by shifting the
snapshots collected in k by uo,k , then compressing them using the singular value decomposition (SVD) method.
Remark 1. In Algorithm 1, 𝜙 ∈ [0, 1] is a user-specified tolerance for controlling the amount of overlap between the
generated clusters. Alternatively, a different clustering algorithm such as fuzzy c-means39 may be used to generate in one
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                               1851




                                                                                                                                     10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
shot a set of overlapping clusters, albeit at an increased computational cost due to an increase in the number of distances
to be computed at each iteration of the algorithm.



Algorithm 1. Introduction of overlapping into a set of initially disjoint snapshot clusters (based on 37)
Input: k , k = 1, … , Nc , 𝜙 ∈ [0, 1]
Output: k+ , k = 1, … , Nc
 1:    ← k , neik ← ∅, for k = 1, … , Nc
      +
     k
 2: for u(s) ∈  do                                                                              ⊳ build intercluster connectivity
 3:     (k, l) ← closest two cluster centers to u (s)

 4:     neik ← neik ∪ l
 5:     neil ← neil ∪ k
 6: end for
 7: for k ∈ {1, … , Nc } do                                                                     ⊳ augment clusters to add overlap
 8:     for l ∈ neik do
 9:           ← closest 𝜙 × |l | snapshots to cluster k in l
10:          k+ ← k+ ∪ 
11:     end for
12: end for




2.3        Online selection of the most-appropriate local subspace of approximation

At any given time t, the most-appropriate local affine subspace in which to approximate the HDM-based solution—or
equivalently, which ROB Vk and affine offset uo,k , k = 1, … , N c , to select for constructing and solving the most-appropriate
PROM-based problem rk = 0 (see (4)) in order to approximate the HDM-based solution—can be determined online as
described below, based on the distances between the PROM-based solution at a sufficiently close previous time t− and the
cluster centroids uc,k .
    At time t = 0, the closest cluster to the initial condition and the corresponding most-appropriate initial PROM-based
solution are given by

                                                  k0 = arg min d(u0 (𝝁), uc,l ),
                                                         l∈{1, … ,Nc }


where d(v, w) = ||v − w||2 , and

                                                 yk0 (0; 𝝁) = VTk0 (u0 (𝝁) − uo,k0 ).

Hence, if at any time t > 0 the PROM-based solution yk− (t; 𝝁) is governed by the subspace approximation
(2) indexed by k− , the closest cluster to the corresponding approximate HDM-based solution is defined
as

                                          k+ = arg min d(uo,k− + Vk− yk− (t; 𝝁), uc,l ).                                       (5)
                                                l∈{1, … ,Nc }


When k+ ≠ k− , the approximate solution uo,k− + Vk− yk− (t; 𝝁) is projected onto the k+ th local affine subspace in order to
maintain consistency in the approximation, which leads to

                                         yk+ (t; 𝝁) = VTk+ (uo,k− + Vk− yk− (t; 𝝁) − uo,k+ ).                                  (6)

   Most importantly, it is noted here that for any pair of indices (k, l) ∈ {1, … , N c } × {1, … , N}, the square of the distance
between the approximate solution uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁) and the centroid of the lth cluster of solution snapshots uc,l can be
written as
1852                                                                                                                          GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                                10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             d(uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁), uc,l )2 = (uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁) − uc,l )T (uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁) − uc,l )
                                           = ||yk (t; 𝝁)||22 + 2(uo,k − uc,l )T Vk yk (t; 𝝁) + ||uo,k − uc,l ||22 .
                                                               ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟             ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
                                                                pre-computable ∈ R1×nk                pre-computable ∈ R


Hence, by precomputing once for all (offline) the O(Nc2 ) fixed, cluster-related reduced-order quantities (uo,k − uc,l )T Vk and
distances ||uo,k − uc,l ||22 , the closest cluster of solution snapshots to the approximate solution uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁), in the sense
defined in (5), can be identified online, in O(N c nk ) operations. Furthermore, for any pair of indices (k, l), the projection
(6) can be expressed as

                          VTl (uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁) − uo,l ) =           VTl Vk             yk (t; 𝝁) + VTl (uo,k − uo,l ),
                                                                       ⏟⏟⏟                             ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
                                                                pre-computable ∈ Rnl ×nk               pre-computable ∈ Rnl


which shows that by precomputing the additional O(Nc2 ) reduced-order matrices VTl Vk and reduced-order vectors
VTl (uo,k − uo,l ), the projection (6) can also be computed online, in O(nk nl ) operations.
     In summary, all computations associated with the online selection of a most-appropriate local subspace of approx-
imation can be performed in real-time during the online solution of a PROM-based problem of the form given
in (4).


2.4        Computational bottlenecks

Nevertheless, although the dimension of the PROM-based problem (4) is nk ≪ N, the cost of solving this problem scales
with both dimensions nk and N ≫ nk , which typically prevents the PROM from achieving real-time or near real-time
performance. To see this, consider first the case where (4) is discretized using an explicit time-integration scheme. The
evaluation of the PROM-based solution at the mth computational time-step for a queried parameter point 𝝁⋆ ∈  requires
in this case the assembly of the following reduced-order quantities:

• Mk (𝝁⋆ ) = WTk M(𝝁⋆ )Vk ∈ Rnk ×nk , which is time-independent and therefore must be performed only once for a queried
  parameter point 𝝁⋆ , and requires O(N 2 nk ) operations (though exploiting sparsity can reduce this computational
  complexity to O(Nnk )).
        m ⋆          ⋆                     m ⋆      ⋆     m ⋆
• bmk (yk (𝝁 ), t ; 𝝁 ) = Wk (f(uo,k + Vk yk (𝝁 ); 𝝁 ) − g (𝝁 )) ∈ R ,
                 m         T                                        nk
                                                                       which is time-dependent, must be per-
  formed at each computational time-step, and requires O(Nnk ) operations. Note that here and throughout
  the remainder of this paper, the superscript m designates as earlier a fully discrete quantity evaluated at
  time tm .

    For an implicit time-integration scheme, the solution by Newton’s method—or any similar method—of the
nk -dimensional nonlinear system of algebraic equations arising at each computational time-step requires, in addition to
the assembly of the reduced-order quantities mentioned above, the construction at each Newton iteration of the following
reduced-order quantities:

• Jm
   k
     (ym
       k
         (𝝁⋆ ); 𝝁⋆ ) = WTk Jm (uo,k + Vk ym
                                          k
                                            (𝝁⋆ ); 𝝁⋆ )Vk ∈ Rnk ×nk , where Jm (um (𝝁); 𝝁) ∈ RN×N is the Jacobian matrix of the
  discrete counterpart of the HDM-based residual (3) with respect to u – that is,

                                                                       𝜕 û̇ m        𝜕f m
                                           Jm (um (𝝁); 𝝁) = M(𝝁)            (u (𝝁)) +    (u (𝝁); 𝝁),                                     (7)
                                                                       𝜕u             𝜕u

          ̂̇ m (𝝁)) is the fully discrete approximation of the time-derivative u̇ m (𝝁) at time-instance tm . For most
   where u(u
   time-integration schemes—including linear multistep and diagonally implicit Runge–Kutta (DIRK) schemes—
   ̂̇ m (𝝁); 𝝁) can be written as
   u(u

                               ̂̇ m (𝝁)) = p(um (𝝁), um−1 (𝝁), … , um−s (𝝁), Δtm , Δtm−1 , … , Δtm−s ),
                               u(u
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                1853




                                                                                                                                      10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    where p is the function characterizing the time-discretization scheme, s is its stencil width, and Δt is the time-step size.
    Hence, the computation of the above reduced-order Jacobian matrix requires in general O(N 2 nk ) operations – or O(Nnk )
    operations when sparsity patterns can be exploited, as is the case for most semi-discretization schemes of interest here.

    From the above discussion, it follows that even for a single parameter 𝝁⋆ , the processing of the the time-dependent
PROM-based problem (4) suffers a computational bottleneck due to a computational complexity that scales not only with
the smaller dimension nk of this PROM, but also with the much larger dimension N of the HDM.
    As explained in Section 1, it is sometimes possible to mitigate the aforementioned computational bottleneck using a
divide and conquer strategy. For many applications however—for example, for compressible flow problems formulated in
terms of conservation state variables—this is simply not possible, particularly when the left ROB Wk , which may depend
on the vector of generalized coordinates,23,24 introduces complex nonlinearities in the PROM. For such applications,
achieving computational efficiency in the solution of the PROM-based problem (4) requires in general the hyper-reduction
of the underlying PROM and more specifically, the hyper-reduction at each computational time-step of the projected
or reduced-order quantities WTk (f(uo,k + Vk ym
                                              k
                                                (𝝁⋆ ); 𝝁⋆ ) − gm (𝝁⋆ )) ∈ Rnk and WTk Jm (uo,k + Vk ym
                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                       (𝝁⋆ ); 𝝁⋆ )Vk ∈ Rnk ×nk dis-
cussed above.


3        HYPER-REDUCTION VIA MESH SAMPLING AND WEIGHTING

3.1        Hyper-reduction of a reduced-order nonlinear residual vector

In this section, an ECSW-type hyper-reduction method is developed for nonlinear, PG PROMs to enable their processing
in a computational complexity that scales only with the small dimension nk ≪ N of the local PROM, k ∈ {1, … , N c }.
Specifically, the hyper-reduction method described herein is independent of the semi-discretization scheme underlying
the 𝝁-parametric, HDM (1) or its residual form (3).
    Let  = {e1 , … , eNe }, with Ne = ||, denote the set of mesh entities describing the discretization of the computational
domain of interest. These entities may be: finite elements in the case of a FE semi-discretization of the PDE underlying
(1) and (3); primal cells in the case of a cell-centered finite volume (FV) semi-discretization; dual cells in the case of a
vertex-based FV semi-discretization; or simply vertices corresponding to collocation points in the case of a finite difference
(FD) semi-discretization of the aforementioned PDE. In all cases, the computation of the reduced-order residual (4) can
be written as

               rk (yk (t; 𝝁), ẏ k (t; 𝝁), t; 𝝁) = WTk r(uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁), Vk ẏ k (t; 𝝁), t; 𝝁)
                                                   ∑
                                                 =      WTk LTe re (Le+ (uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁)), Le+ Vk ẏ k (t; 𝝁), t; 𝝁),      (8)
                                                 e ∈ 


where:

• Le ∈ {0, 1}de ×N is the Boolean matrix that localizes a high-dimensional global vector (dimension N) to the de DOFs
  attached to the mesh entity e.
• Le+ ∈ {0, 1}de+ ×N is the Boolean matrix that localizes a high-dimensional global vector (dimension N) to the de+ ≥ de
  DOFs attached to the mesh entity e and a set of neighboring mesh entities determined by the stencil of the cho-
  sen semi-discretization method: for example, de+ = de for a FE semi-discretization, de+ > de for a cell-centered or
  vertex-based FV semi-discretization, and de+ > de for an FD semi-discretization.
• re (Le+ (uo,k + Vk yk (t; 𝝁)), Le+ Vk ẏ k (t; 𝝁), t; 𝝁) ∈ Rde is the contribution of the mesh entity e to the global, HDM-based
  residual r ∈ RN .

    The fully discrete counterpart of the reduced-order, semi-discrete residual (8) is
                                                               ∑
                                     rm
                                      k
                                        (ym
                                          k
                                            (𝝁), tm ; 𝝁) =                     e (Le+ (uo,k + Vk yk (𝝁)), t ; 𝝁).
                                                                      WTk LTe rm                  m        m
                                                                                                                               (9)
                                                              e ∈ 


   Now, let ̃ ⊂  denote an optimally sampled subset of the set of mesh entities , with Ñe = ||
                                                                                                ̃ ≪ Ne (see Section 4).
A natural approach for approximating the PROM-based residual (9) can be written as
1854                                                                                                           GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                     ( m            )       ( m            )  ∑               (  (                ) m )
                  rm
                   k
                      yk (𝝁), tm ; 𝝁 ≈ r̃ m
                                          k
                                             yk (𝝁), tm ; 𝝁 =   𝜉e WTk LTe rm
                                                                            e Le+ uo,k + Vk yk (𝝁) , t ; 𝝁 ,
                                                                                             m
                                                                                                                         (10)
                                                            e ∈ ̃


where r̃ m is referred to as the hyper-reduced fully discrete residual vector and the set of weights {𝜉e |e ∈ }̃ associated
         k
                                        ̃
with the set of sampled mesh entities  leads to interpreting the approximation scheme (10) as a generalized quadrature
rule. Since Ñe ≪ Ne , it follows from (10) that the hyper- reduced fully discrete vector r̃ m
                                                                                            k
                                                                                              can be efficiently evaluated at
any time-instance and/or queried parameter point in a number of operations that is independent of the dimension N of
the HDM.
Remark 2. It is noted that unlike hyper-reduction methods of the approximate-then-project type, the hyper-reduction
approximation (10) does not attempt to accurately represent the high-dimensional residual rm , but only of its projection
onto the left subspace spanned by the columns of the left ROB Wk .


3.2       Hyper-reduction of a reduced-order Jacobian matrix

In the event where Newton’s method or a variant is chosen for solving a steady-state counterpart of the
nonlinear, PROM-based equation (4), or for solving the nonlinear system of equations arising at each
time-step of the implicit time-discretization of this PROM-based equation, the resulting reduced-order Jaco-
bian matrix may need to be reconstructed at each Newton iteration and at least at each time-step in the
latter case. In such circumstances, computational efficiency calls for hyper-reducing this PROM matrix when it
arises.
    Here, attention is focused on the time-dependent case and an implicit time-discretization, as the explicit scenario
is a sub-case of this case and the steady-state scenario is a particular instance of this case. At each time-step tm , the
reduced-order counterpart of the Jacobian matrix (7) can be written as
                                 ( m       )  ∑            (  (                ) )
                              Jm
                               k
                                  yk (𝝁); 𝝁 =            e Le+ uo,k + Vk yk (𝝁) ; 𝝁 Le+ Vk .
                                                WTk LTe Jm                m
                                                                                                                         (11)
                                               e ∈ 


As in Section 3.1, Le and Le+ denote here the de × N and d+e × N Boolean matrices that localize a high-dimensional
vector (dimension N) to the de and d+e DOFs associated with the same mesh entity e, respectively, and
   (                        )
 e Le+ (uo,k + Vk yk (𝝁)); 𝝁 ∈ R
                                 de ×d+e
Jm                 m
                                         is the Jacobian matrix of re with respect to yk .
   Since the reduced-order matrix Jm      k
                                            (ym
                                              k
                                                (𝝁); 𝝁) (11) is the Jacobian matrix of the fully discrete PROM-based resid-
     m
ual rk (9) with respect to yk , it is proposed here to perform its hyper-reduction by computing the Jacobian of the
hyper-reduced semi-discrete residual r̃ m   k
                                               (10) with respect to yk . This leads to the consistent hyper-reduced Jacobian
matrix

                    m(          ) 𝜕̃rm (              )  ∑                (  (                ) )
                 J̃ k ym (𝝁); 𝝁  = k ym    (𝝁), tm ; 𝝁 =    𝜉e WTk LTe Jm
                                                                        e Le+ uo,k + Vk yk (𝝁) ; 𝝁 Le+ Vk ,
                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                         (12)
                       k          𝜕yk    k
                                                          ̃
                                                          e ∈ 


and therefore guarantees in principle a good performance of the application of Newton’s method or a variant to the
solution of the fully-discrete, PROM-based nonlinear problem at hand.
    In many applications and PMOR methods, including PG-based methods such as the residual-minimizing least-squares
                                                                                        ( m       )
PG (LSPG) projection method,23,24 each of the reduced-order Jacobian matrix Jm           yk (𝝁); 𝝁 and mesh-entity-level
                                          (   (                )   )                  k
reduced-order Jacobian matrix WTk LTe Je Le+ uo,k + Vk ym k
                                                            (𝝁) ; 𝝁 Le+ Vk appearing in (11) is SPD. In order to guarantee
that the above hyper-reduction approximation preserves this property, both hyper-reduction approximations (10) and (12)
are equipped here with the constraint 𝜉e > 0, ∀e ∈ . ̃ When this constraint is not needed, it can be removed, or simply
enforced to enable the use of a unified computational approach for sampling a set of mesh entities ̃ and computing the
                                         ̃ (see Section 4).
associated set of weights Ξ̃ = {𝜉e |e ∈ }


3.3       Grouped versus individual hyper-reduction approximations

From (3), it follows that the fully discrete residual (9) can also be written as
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                 1855




                                                                                                                                       10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                      ( m            ) (             )                 (                          )
                   rm
                    k
                       yk (𝝁), tm ; 𝝁 = WTk M(𝝁)Vk ẏ m (𝝁) + WTk fm uo,k + Vk ym     k
                                                                                         (𝝁); 𝝁 − WTk gm (tm ; 𝝁),             (13)
                                       ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟        ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟ ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
                                               Mk                                       fm
                                                                                         k
                                                                                                         gm
                                                                                                          k



where
                                                        ∑
                                           Mk (𝝁) =             WTk LTe Me (𝝁)Le Vk .                                          (14)
                                                        e ∈ 

                                     ( m      )  ∑            (  (                ) )
                                   k yk (𝝁); 𝝁 =
                                  fm                        e Le+ uo,k + Vk yk (𝝁) ; 𝝁 .
                                                   WTk LTe fm                m
                                                                                                                               (15)
                                                      e ∈ 
                                                         ∑
                                        gm
                                         k
                                           (tm ; 𝝁) =                    e (t ; 𝝁).
                                                                WTk LTe gm   m
                                                                                                                               (16)
                                                        e ∈ 


At this point, the reader may ask why in Section 3.1 hyper-reduction was applied in (10) to the above reduced-order terms
                                                                         ( m            )
as a group, specifically, collectively as the fully discrete residual rm
                                                                       k
                                                                          yk (𝝁), tm ; 𝝁 , rather than to each of them individually.
Before answering this question, a noteworthy observation that differentiates between the hyper-reduction of a Galerkin
PROM and that of a PG PROM is discussed below.
    Consider first the case of a Galerkin PROM (Wk = Vk ) and an HDM where only the nonlinear flux vector is paramet-
ric – that is, where f depends on the vector of parameters 𝝁 and on the solution u, but the mass matrix M is constant
and the source term g depends only on time t. In this case, both Mk = VTk MVk and gm               (tm ) = VTk gm are precomputable
                                                       ( m       )                               k
and therefore only the reduced-order vector fk yk (𝝁); 𝝁 needs be considered for hyper-reduction. For many highly
                                                     m

nonlinear applications (e.g., high-speed compressible fluid flow and solid mechanics with finite-strain viscoelasticity),
                               ( m       )
the reduced-order term fm    k yk (𝝁); 𝝁 can be expected to exhibit nonpolynomial nonlinearities at least with respect to
                 (                 )
u (specifically, uo,k + Vk ym   (𝝁) ) and hence to benefit from hyper-reduction. Hence, in this scenario where only the
                          ( mk      )
reduced-order term fm  k   yk
                              (𝝁); 𝝁 (15) needs to be hyper-reduced at each time-step tm , the set of mesh entities ̃ ⊂  and
the associated set of weights Ξ̃ = {𝜉e |e ∈ } ̃ should be determined so that the application to (15) of the approximation
defined in (10) is sufficiently accurate.
    Consider next the case of a PG PROM (Wk ≠ Vk ) and a parametric or nonparametric HDM. In this case, the ability
to pre-compute any of the terms (14), (15), and (16) also depends on whether the left ROB Wk is fixed in the parameter
and time spaces and is independent of the solution uk (t; 𝝁) (or its subspace approximation uo,k + Vk ym            k
                                                                                                                      (𝝁)). For many
PG-based PMOR methods—for example, for the residual-minimizing LSPG projection method23,24 —the left ROB evolves
together with the reduced-order vector of generalized coordinates ym         k
                                                                               . For such a method, none of the reduced-order
terms (14,15,16) can be precomputed and therefore all of them must be hyper-reduced in the presence of nonpolynomial
nonlinearities with respect to any of their variables. Hence, in this case—which can be expected to be typical in the
context of PG PROMs—and in other cases where at least two of the reduced-order terms defining the PG PROM are
to be hyper-reduced, the question becomes whether these reduced-order terms should be hyper-reduced as a group, or
individually.
    Hyper-reducing multiple reduced-order terms as a group as in the hyperreduction of the parametric, nonlinear,
fully discrete residual (10) is most cost effective. It requires training a single set of mesh entities ̃ ⊂  and associated
weights Ξ̃ = {𝜉e |e ∈ }̃ as described in the next section. On the other hand, hyper-reducing multiple reduced-order
terms individually can be performed in two different ways:

• 1: By sampling multiple sets of mesh entities and computing for each an associated set of weights.
• 2: By computing a single set of mesh entities ̃ and its associated set of weights Ξ̃ so that the application
  of the generalized quadrature rule to the approximation of each reduced-order term individually is sufficiently
  accurate.

   The approach 1 is clearly less computationally efficient than hyper-reducing multiple reduced-order terms as a
group. The approach 2 is less cumbersome than its counterpart 1 as it does not involve manipulating multiple sets
of mesh entities and associated sets of weights. Nevertheless, the approach 2 is less computationally efficient than
hyper-reducing multiple reduced-order terms as a group as it entails training ̃ and Ξ̃ to be accurate for many more
approximations. However, it can be expected to be more accurate for the same computational cost.
1856                                                                                                             GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                   10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    There are a few applications for which achieving a desired level of accuracy requires performing necessary
hyper-reductions at the individual level. An example is the fast solution of parametric generalized eigenvalue problems by
HPROMs,40 where two sets of unknowns—namely, the eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors—are governed
by a single algebraic equation that can be written in residual form. In this case, accuracy dictates hyper-reducing the gen-
eralized mass and stiffness matrices individually; and for this purpose, computational efficiency as well as practicality call
for adopting the approach labeled above as 2. For the class of problems considered in this paper however, which is rep-
resented by the HDM (1) and involves for each k ∈ {1, … , N c } a single set of unknowns ym  k
                                                                                               , performing hyper-reduction
at the group level as in (10)—which is most computationally efficient—can deliver the desired level of accuracy, as show
in Section 5 for several challenging problems. Hence for this class of problems, necessary hyper-reduction is performed
here at the group level as in (10).


4        IMPLEMENTAT ION

4.1        Mesh sampling and weighting

Given a set of mesh entities  = {e1 , … , eNe } describing the discretization of the computational domain of interest, the
mesh sampling and weighting problem is defined here as that of finding the smallest subset of mesh entities ̃ ⊂  and
                                             ̃ for which the hyper-reduction approximations (10) and (12) are sufficiently
the associated set of weights Ξ̃ = {𝜉e |e ∈ }
accurate (in the sense specified below). As shown in References 19,22 for the case of a nonlinear Galerkin PROM based
on a single global ROB, this can can be achieved using what is known nowadays as a supervised training or machine
learning approach. Furthermore, since (12) is nothing but the Jacobian of (10) with respect to yk , it suffices to train the
            (      )
              ̃ Ξ̃ only for the hyper-reduction approximation (10).
pair of sets ,
    In the context of local subspace approximations, two different mesh sampling and weighting approaches can be
considered:

• An approach where a single set of mesh entities ̃ and an associated set of weights Ξ̃ is constructed by training both
  sets for all local approximations k = 1, … , N c , simultaneously.
                                                     (      )
• An alternative approach where N c pairs of sets ̃ k , Ξ̃ , k = 1, … , N c , are constructed and each is trained for a single
                                                            k
    instance of the local approximation defined in (2).

    For a fixed level of accuracy, the first approach can be expected to lead to a set of mesh entities ̃ that is larger than
any of the counterpart sets ̃ k delivered by the second approach and therefore to deliver a lesser online performance
from the wall-clock time viewpoint. Nevertheless, this approach is simpler than the second one which would require an
elaborate computer implementation and a considerable amount of bookkeeping to handle multiple reduced meshes (see
Section 4.2). For this reason, only the first approach is considered here. It is noted, however, that the implementation of
the second approach can be built around that of the first one in a rather straightforward manner.
                                                                                          (      )
    For both convenience and computational efficiency, the training of the pair of sets ,  ̃ Ξ̃ is not performed directly on
generalized coordinates snapshots yk(s) , k ∈ {1, … , N c }, because this would be computationally inefficient for the following
reasons:

• Such a training would require two different series of offline simulations, namely:
  − A series of HDM-based simulations designed to generate a first set of solution snapshots k (see Section 2.2) for
    constructing the right and left local ROBs Vk and Wk , respectively, k ∈ {1, … , N c }, as well as the associated nonlinear
    PG PROMs.
  − Another series of nonlinear simulations based on these non hyper-reduced PG PROMs to generate N c additional sets
    of solution snapshots of the form k = {ym k
                                                 (𝝁q )}, k ∈ {1, … , N c }, for hyper-reducing the constructed PG PROMs.
• The second series of PROM-based computations would be very compute intensive due to the absence of
  hyper-reduction.
                                 (      )
     Instead, the pair of sets ,  ̃ Ξ̃ is efficiently trained here using a subset H of the same set of solution snapshots 
used for constructing the local subspace approximations (see Section 2.1)—that is, H ⊆  – as follows. For any snapshot
                                                                                                     (          )
u(s) ∈ H , let ks ∈ {1, … , N c } denote the index of the unique cluster k containing this snapshot k ∋ u(s) . This solution
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                         1857




                                                                                                                               10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
snapshot can be converted on the fly into its approximation uo,ks + Vks yks using the orthogonal projector

                                                           Π⟂V = Vks VTk ,
                                                              ks          s



—that is, the orthogonal projector onto the subspace spanned by the columns of the local right ROB Vks .
Hence, each solution snapshot u(s) ∈ H is transformed here on the fly into the following vector of generalized
coordinates yks
                                                               (            )
                                                      yks = VTk u(s) − uo,ks .
                                                                   s

                                            (                                    )                                 (      )
                                                                                                                     ̃ Ξ̃ .
Next, the corresponding discrete residual rm uo,ks + Π⟂V (u(s) − uo,ks ), tm ; 𝝁q is computed and used for training ,
                                                        ks
   Now, let
                                   (      (                 ( (s)         )) m q )
                                                        ⟂
                  cse = WTk LTe rm
                                 e   L e+   u  o,k  +  ΠVks  u    − uo,k    , t ; 𝝁 ∈ Rnks ,      s = 1, … , NH
                        ∑s
                                                  s                     s
                                         (              )
                  ds =      ckse = rmk
                                           yks , tm ; 𝝁q ∈ Rnks ,                                s = 1, … , NH ,
                                      s
                        e ∈ 


where NH = |H |. Using the above notation, the exact assembly of the training data on the original mesh (associated with
the HDM) can be written as

                                                              C1 = d,

where

                                                     ⎛∑NH      ⎞
                                                     ⎜         ⎟                                ∑NH
                            ⎡ c11         …  c1Ne ⎤  ⎜    n ks ⎟×Ne
                                                                                       ⎡ d1 ⎤
                            ⎢                      ⎥ ⎜ s=1 ⎟                           ⎢    ⎥
                          C=⎢ ⋮           ⋱   ⋮ ⎥ ∈ R⎝         ⎠                   d = ⎢ ⋮ ⎥ ∈ R s=1 nks               (17)
                            ⎢                      ⎥                                   ⎢    ⎥
                            ⎣cNH 1        … cNH Ne ⎦                                   ⎣dNH ⎦

and 1 is the N e -dimensional vector of ones. Then, the hyper-reduction approximation (10) can be written in matrix form
as

                                                            C𝝃 − d ≈ 0,

                                                                                                                 ̃ This
where 𝝃 ∈ RNe is the vector of element weights with a zero in each entry corresponding to a mesh entity e ∈  ⧵ .
suggests formulating the problem of mesh sampling and weighting as finding a minimal subset of mesh entities ̃ and the
corresponding set of weights Ξ̃ for which the hyper-reduction approximation (10) retains a specified level of accuracy
when applied to the training dataset—that is,

                                           (    )
                                            ̃ Ξ = arg min||𝜻||0
                                            ,
                                                       subject to ||C𝜻 − d||2 ≤ 𝜀||d||2                                (18)
                                                                              𝜻 ≥ 0.

In (18) above , ||⬦||0 denotes the 𝓁 0 -“norm” which counts the number of nonzero entries in ⬦ and 𝜀 ∈ [0, 1] is a small,
user specified, relative error tolerance for controlling the accuracy of the hyper-reduction approximation.
    Unfortunately, the optimization problem underlying (18) is well known to be NP-hard and thus is computationally
intractable, even for mesh sizes that are small by computational mechanics standards. For this reason, it was proposed
in Reference 41 to solve instead a convex approximation of this problem that promotes sparsity in the solution. For this
purpose, several choices were identified and discussed in Reference 41, including the following nonnegative least-squares
(NNLS) formulation
1858                                                                                                           GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                  minimize      ||C𝜻 − d||22
                                                                                                                         (19)
                                                  subject to    𝜻 ≥ 0,

equipped with the threshold-based early termination criterion

                                                    ||C𝜻 − d||2 ≤ 𝜀||d||2 .                                              (20)

This criterion replaces the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker optimality conditions and is necessary for promoting sparsity in the
solution. Here, the convex optimization problem (19) is chosen as the alternative for the NP-hard problem (18) and solved
using a distributed implementation of the active set algorithm proposed in Reference 42. This implementation, which was
developed in Reference 41, features a parallel, updatable, QR factorization kernel for efficiently solving at each iteration
the over-determined system of equations.
    In summary, mesh sampling and weighting is performed here by solving offline the optimization problem (19), as in
the original ECSW hyper-reduction method for Galerkin PROMs.19,22 The solution of this problem delivers simultane-
ously the subset of mesh entities ̃ and the associated set of weights Ξ̃ . The resulting ECSW hyper-reduction method for
PG PROMs differentiates itself from alternatives such as EIM,9 DEIM,15 GNAT,23,24 and other hyper-reduction methods
of the approximate-then-project type in at least two major ways:
                                                               (      )
                                                                 ̃ Ξ̃ by efficiently solving a rigorous, convex approx-
• From an algorithmic viewpoint, it determines the pair of sets ,
  imation of the true sampling problem (18). The aforementioned alternatives rely on a heuristic, suboptimal greedy
  procedure to sample the original mesh (associated with the HDM).
• From a practical viewpoint, it has only one tuning parameter—that is, the tolerance 𝜀 whose value can be chosen to
  trade the sparsity of ̃ for the accuracy of the resulting hyper-reduction approximation. In general, the aforementioned
  alternatives depend on multiple tunable parameters. In their simplest form, many of them require specifying a priori the
                                                                            ̃
  size of the sampled set of mesh entities–that is, their own equivalent of —which  is impractical as it typically requires a
  less intuitive trial and error approach for determining a mesh sample that delivers the desired level of hyper-reduction
  accuracy.

    As stated in the introduction of this paper, a general concern for hyper-reduction is the computational cost of its
offline phase. For the hyper-reduction method presented so far, this cost is dominated by the computational cost of solv-
ing problem (19), which itself is determined by the size of the matrix C characterizing this problem. The size of C is
                 ∑NH
determined by s=1     nks , which depends on the number of training solution snapshots and the average dimension of the
local subspace approximation, and by the number of elements N e of the original mesh (associated with the HDM). For
structural dynamics applications, FE models with N e = O(105 ), a number of training solution snapshots N H = O(102 ), a
global ROB with nk = n = 100, and nonlinear Galerkin PROMs, it was shown in Reference 41 that the parallel imple-
mentation of the NNLS solver developed in that reference is scalable on up to 64 cores of a Linux cluster and solves
problem (19) on such a computing system in roughly 2-min wall-clock time. Another significant contribution of this
paper is to show that even for CFD problems with N e = O(108 ), which is typical for industrial-scale applications, and a
number of training solution snapshots N H = O(10), the matrix C can be built offline on a computing system with 3584
cores in less than 15 min and the aforementioned NNLS solver can compute on this system in roughly 16-min wall-clock
                     (       )
time a pair of sets , ̃ Ξ̃ for which the hyper-reduction approximation performed on nonlinear PG PROMs is very
accurate.
Remark 3. When hyper-reducing a fully discrete residual as in (10), the training solution snapshots chosen to
construct offline
           (      the training matrix C and
                                        )   training vector d (17) should be collected such that each training
residual rm uo,ks + Π⟂V (u(s) − uo,ks ), tm ; 𝝁q is sufficiently large in magnitude. Hence, a recommended strategy is
                        ks
to collect a solution snapshot for H at the beginning of a time-step tm , where the Newton iteration is typi-
cally initialized using the converged solution at the previous time-step, um−1 – and therefore where ||rm ||2 is the
largest during that time-step. Collecting instead a training solution snapshot at the end of a time-step, after the
Newton iterations during that time-step have converged, would lead to near-zero training residuals. This in turn
                                                  (      )
would lead to a poor training of the pair ,        ̃ Ξ̃ due to very small amplitude and therefore nearly redundant
data.
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                       1859




                                                                                                                             10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4.2        Construction of a reduced mesh

From (10) and (12), it follows that as far as mesh entities are concerned, evaluating the hyperreduced residual vectors
and Jacobian matrices associated with PG PROMs using the ECSW method described above requires access only to ̃ and
to the neighbors of each mesh entity e ∈ ̃ defining at e the spatial discretization stencil underlying the HDM. Hence,
it is convenient to support such evaluations with a “reduced mesh” defined by the augmented set ̃ ⊂  consisting of
                                                                                                       +

the mesh entities underlying the nonzero entries of the Boolean localization matrix Le+ (hence, ̃ ⊂ ̃ ). This is because
                                                                                                        +

just like the HDM-based residuals and Jacobians can be conveniently computed on the mesh associated with the HDM,
their hyper-reduced counterparts (10) and (12) can be conveniently computed on the reduced mesh. Due to the locality
                                                    ̃ ≪ Ne ⇒ |̃ + | ≪ Ne , which means that the online evaluations of the
properties of most spatial discretization schemes, ||
hyper-reduction approximations (10) and (12) can be efficiently performed on the reduced mesh.


5       APPLICAT IONS

Here, the proposed adaptation to PG PROMs of the ECSW hyper-reduction method and its performance are illustrated
and assessed, respectively, for three CFD applications:

• An academic problem of laminar flow over a circular cylinder that has the added benefit of being easily reproducible
  by the reader. For this problem, the performance of the proposed hyper-reduction method is compared to that of two
  alternative hyper-reduction methods for PG PROMs: the GNAT method;23,24 and the least-squares collocation method25
  equipped with the same reduced mesh produced by the gappy-POD-based GNAT method.
• An unsteady wake flow problem associated with the Ahmed body geometry—which is considered by the automotive
  industry to be a benchmark problem for CFD.
• A very large-scale, turbulent CFD problem of industrial relevance—specifically, the prediction of the turbulent flow
  past an F-16C/D Block 40 aircraft configuration with external stores at a high angle of attack.

     In particular, the second and third applications outlined above demonstrate the combination of local subspace approx-
imations for mitigating the well-known Kolmogorov n-width barrier for the PMOR of first-order nonlinear hyperbolic
problems such as those associated with convection-dominated CFD problems43 and the proposed ECSW hyper-reduction
method for achieving computational efficiency.
     In each application introduced above, the HDM-based problem (1) is constructed by semi-discretizing the nondimen-
sional form of the three-dimensional, compressible, Navier–Stokes equations by a mixed FV/FE method. In this method,
the spatial approximation of the convective fluxes is performed using an asymptotically third-order, upwind, vertex-based
FV scheme based on the MUSCL-type approach and Roe’s approximate Riemann solver,44,45 while the diffusive term and
all source terms are treated by a piecewise-linear, Galerkin FE scheme. In the second and third applications, turbulence
modeling is performed using the detached-eddy simulation (DES) approach based on the Spalart–Allmaras one-equation
model.46 The resulting nonlinear flux vector f (u(t; 𝝁); 𝝁) (see (3)) is not characterized by a polynomial dependence on
the high-dimensional solution vector u(t; 𝝁): for this reason, hyper-reduction is required to reduce the computational
complexity of each constructed PROM.
     It is noted that for each application highlighted above, the PROM and HPROM are constructed for a single parameter
instance 𝝁⋆ of the HDM, for two different reasons: (1) the highly nonlinear, time-dependent nature of the flow problem
already necessitates hyper-reduction due to the computational bottlenecks discussed in Section 2.4; and (2) the sheer
size of the HDM—of the order of 107 to 108 DOFs—is such that considering instead a parametric instance of the flow
problem would lead to an unnecessary consumption of precious CPU resources without adding significant value to the
performance assessment intended here.
     In each application:

• Time-discretization of the HDM is performed using an implicit scheme and the nonlinear system of equations aris-
  ing at each computational time-step is solved by a Newton–Krylov method equipped with an additive Schwarz
  preconditioned GMRES47 algorithm as the linear equation solver.
• The PG PROM is constructed using the LSPG method.23,24 Hence, Wk is defined at each time-instance tm by
1860                                                                                                         GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                               10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                        ( m       )    (                   )
                                Wk = Wm
                                      k
                                         yk (𝝁); 𝝁 = Jm uo,k + Vk ym
                                                                   k
                                                                     (𝝁); 𝝁 Vk ∈ RN×nk ,
                                         (                   )
   where the HDM-based Jacobian matrix Jm uo,k + Vk ym
                                                     k
                                                       (𝝁); 𝝁 is given in (7).
• The parallel variant of the Lawson and Hanson NNLS algorithm based on an updatable QR factorization developed in
  Reference 41 is used to solve the convex optimization problem (19) equipped with (20) and 𝜀 = 1 × 10−2 , and produce
  the reduced mesh ̃ and associated set of weights Ξ̃ .
• The accuracy of the constructed LSPG HPROM is assessed for a selection of quantities of interest (QoIs) using in
  each case the relative error with respect to the counterpart value obtained from the solution of the HDM-based
  problem
                                                 √            (        )
                                                  ∑            ̃ − Q(t) 2
                                                      t ∈     Q(t)
                                         REQ =        √∑                     × 100 (%),
                                                                         2
                                                              t ∈  Q(t)


          ̃ is the approximation of the QoI Q(t) obtained by reconstructing the solution of the PROM-based problem
   where Q(t)
   (4) equipped with the hyper-reductions (10) and (12) and employing the same postprocessing procedures as for the
   HDM-based solution,  is the set of time-stamps used for evaluating REQ —that is,
                                            {                                 }
                                          = t ∈ {0, ΔsRE , 2ΔsRE … } ∶ t ≤ Tf ,

   and ΔsRE denotes the sampling time-interval for the computation of REQ .
• The performance of the LSPG HPROM is assessed by computing the speedup factors it delivers with respect
  to both the CPU time and wall-clock time elapsed in the solution of the HDM-based problem. For this pur-
  pose, each speedup factor is defined here as the ratio of the CPU (wall-clock) time elapsed in the solution of
  the LSPG HPROM-based problem and the CPU (wall-clock) time elapsed in the solution of the underlying HDM
  problem.

    Finally, it is specified that all numerical simulations reported herein are performed in double precision
arithmetic.


5.1       Laminar flow over a circular cylinder

5.1.1       High-dimensional model

The first application considered here focuses on the computation of a two-dimensional, laminar flow over a right circular
cylinder at the Reynolds number Re = 100 and the free-stream Mach number M ∞ = 0.2. At this Reynolds number, the
flow exhibits periodic vortex shedding after a transient startup phase: it demonstrates well the von Kármán vortex street.
This problem is a commonly studied academic problem and therefore has the added benefit of being easily reproducible
by the reader.
    For this application, the computational domain is chosen as the disk of diameter 40D, where D denotes the cylin-
der diameter. This domain is discretized using a one-element-thick, unstructured, three-dimensional mesh with 98,140
vertices and 284,700 tetrahedral elements. Figure 2(A) shows the computational mesh. Symmetry boundary conditions
are applied on its spanwise faces to ensure that the resulting flow is two-dimensional. A no-slip adiabatic wall bound-
ary condition is applied on the cylinder surface. The dimension of the resulting semi-discrete HDM is N = 490, 700. This
HDM is time-discretized using a second-order DIRK scheme and a fixed nondimensional time-step Δt = 1 × 10−1 , which,
for the aforementioned CFD mesh, corresponds to a CFL number based on the smallest mesh cell of approximately
7,600. The initial condition for the HDM-based simulation is computed by impulsively starting the flow from a uniform
state and time-integrating the semi-discrete HDM until the onset of vortex shedding. Then, the semi-discrete HDM is
time-integrated from this initial condition until the end of the nondimensional time-interval [0, 200]. At roughly t = 100,
the flow becomes periodic. The computed flow solution using the discrete HDM is in good agreement with the results of
experimental and other numerical studies of this problem.48,49
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                 1861




                                                                                                                                       10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                            (A)                                 (B)                                 (C)

F I G U R E 2 Two-dimensional flow problem over a right circular cylinder: discretized computational domain (A); reduced mesh
constructed using the proposed energy-conserving sampling and weighting method (B); and reduced mesh constructed using the
gappy-proper orthogonal decomposition-based Gauss–Newton with approximated tensors method (C)



T A B L E 1 Two-dimensional flow problem over a right circular cylinder: number of mesh cells
                                                                                                    n        Ñe       Ñe ∕Ne (%)
sampled by energy-conserving sampling and weighting for each constructed global subspace
approximation (ε = 1 × 10−2 )                                                                        9        75      0.076
                                                                                                    35       321      0.327




5.1.2        Hyperreduced LSPG projection-based reduced-order models

In the first nondimensional time subinterval [0, 150], the HDM-based solution is sampled at the nondimensional rate
defined by Δs = 2 × 10−1 (recall that after t = 150, the solution remains periodic). Two different global (N c = 1) affine
subspace approximations are constructed by compressing the N s = 751 solution snapshots collected in [0, 150] using SVD
and building two right ROBs of dimension n = 9 and n = 35. These two right ROBs correspond to the singular value energy
truncation tolerances of 99% and 99.99%, respectively. In both cases, the affine offset uo is set to the initial condition of
the problem. Then, the ECSW method described in this paper is applied to construct for each aforementioned subspace
approximation an associated reduced mesh using N H = 376 training residual snapshots and the corresponding LSPG
HPROM. The training residual snapshots are computed from the sampling of the HDM-based solution in [0, 150] at the
nondimensional rate ΔsH = 4 × 10−1 . The size Ñe of each constructed reduced mesh is given in Table 1. The reader can
observe that this size is a tiny fraction of the size N e of the CFD mesh outlined above.
    Next, for each size Ñe reported in Table 1, an additional reduced mesh is constructed using the gappy-POD-based
GNAT method.23,24 This additional reduced mesh is to be used in both the GNAT hyper-reduction method and the
least-squares collocation method (which in principle can be equipped with any reduced mesh). Figure 2(B) shows the
reduced mesh delivered by ECSW for n = 35 and Figure 2(C) shows the alternative reduced mesh of the same size con-
structed using the alternative gappy-POD-based GNAT method. Using these reduced meshes, each constructed LSPG
HPROM is discretized using the same second-order DIRK scheme applied to discretize the underlying HDM and the
same nondimensional time-step Δt = 1 × 10−1 , and time-integrated on a single core of the same Linux cluster on which
the HDM-based simulation is performed.


5.1.3        Performance of various hyper-reduction methods

For the case n = 9, the time-histories of the lift coefficient, drag coefficient, and velocity components at a probe located
5D downstream from the cylinder’s trailing edge computed using the following computational models are reported in
Figure 3:

• The HDM.
• The LSPG HPROM constructed using the ECSW hyper-reduction method.
1862                                                                                                                      GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                            10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                    0.8                                                     1.5


                                                                            1.4
                    0.4

                                                                            1.3




                                                                      cD
          cL

                      0
                                                                            1.2

                -0.4                          HDM                                                         HDM
                                              GNAT HPROM                    1.1                           GNAT HPROM
                                              Collocation HPROM                                           Collocation HPROM
                                              ECSW HPROM                                                  ECSW HPROM
                -0.8                                                             1
                          0    50      100          150        200                   0     50      100         150         200
                                       Time                                                        Time
                                        (A)                                                         (B)
                      1                                                         1.5


                    0.8                                                           1


                    0.6                                                         0.5
           vx / v




                                                                       vy / v
                    0.4                                                           0


                    0.2                                                         -0.5
                                              HDM                                                         HDM
                                              GNAT HPROM                                                  GNAT HPROM
                      0                       Collocation HPROM                  -1                       Collocation HPROM
                                              ECSW HPROM                                                  ECSW HPROM
                    -0.2                                                        -1.5
                           0   50      100          150        200                     0   50      100          150           200
                                       Time                                                        Time
                                        (C)                                                         (D)

F I G U R E 3 Two-dimensional flow problem over a right circular cylinder—time-histories computed using the high-dimensional
computational model and various least-squares PG hyper-reduced counterpart PROMs of dimension n = 9 of: the lift coefficient (A); drag
coefficient (B); streamwise velocity component at a probe (C); and the normal velocity component at the same probe (D)




• The LSPG HPROM constructed using the GNAT hyper-reduction method.
• The LSPG HPROM constructed using the least-squares collocation hyperreduction method equipped with the reduced
  mesh generated by the gappy-POD-based GNAT method.

    Figure 4 reports the counterpart results for the case n = 35. The reader can observe that in both cases, the LSPG
HPROM built using the GNAT method is numerically unstable and fails to complete the simulation in the specified
time-interval. In both cases, the counterpart LSPG HPROM built using the least-squares collocation method is numeri-
cally stable, but fails to deliver an acceptable accuracy. On the other hand, the ECSW-based LSPG HPROM is numerically
stable in both cases and delivers exceptional accuracy.
    Table 2 quantifies for this problem the relative errors incurred for the chosen QoIs using ΔsRE = Δt = 1 × 10−1 . The
relative errors for the GNAT-based LSPG HPROM are not included due to the numerical instability exhibited by this
HPROM in the time-interval of interest. These errors demonstrate further the superior accuracy of the ECSW-based LSPG
HPROM.
    Figure 5 compares a snapshot of the solution vorticity computed at t = 50 using the HDM with coun-
terparts computed using the various LSPG HPROMs of dimension n = 35 described above. Note that t = 50
is the time-instance just before that at which the simulation performed using the GNAT hyper-reduction
method terminates prematurely. Again, the reader can observe that for the same PROM—namely, the
LSPG PROM—the ECSW-based LSPG HPROM delivers the best reconstruction of the solution at this
time-instance.
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                                   1863




                                                                                                                                                         10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                       0.8                                                    1.5


                                                                              1.4
                       0.4

                                                                              1.3




                                                                         cD
             cL
                         0
                                                                              1.2

                   -0.4                            HDM                                                           HDM
                                                   GNAT HPROM                 1.1                                GNAT HPROM
                                                   Collocation HPROM                                             Collocation HPROM
                                                   ECSW HPROM                                                    ECSW HPROM
                   -0.8                                                            1
                             0    50        100         150        200                 0      50          100         150        200
                                            Time                                                          Time
                                            (A)                                                           (B)
                         1                                                        1.5


                       0.8                                                          1


                       0.6                                                        0.5
              vx / v




                                                                         vy / v
                       0.4                                                          0


                       0.2                                                        -0.5
                                                   HDM                                                           HDM
                                                   GNAT HPROM                                                    GNAT HPROM
                         0                         Collocation HPROM               -1                            Collocation HPROM
                                                   ECSW HPROM                                                    ECSW HPROM
                       -0.2                                                       -1.5
                              0   50        100          150       200                   0    50          100          150           200
                                            Time                                                          Time
                                            (C)                                                           (D)

F I G U R E 4 Two-dimensional flow problem over a right circular cylinder—time-histories computed using the high-dimensional
computational model and various least-squares PG hyper-reduced counterpart PROMs of dimension n = 35 of: the lift coefficient (A); drag
coefficient (B); streamwise velocity component at a probe (C); and the normal velocity component at the same probe (D)




T A B L E 2 Two-dimensional
                                        n           Model                          REcD (%)        REcL (%)          REvx (%)              REvy (%)
flow problem over a right circular
cylinder: computational accuracy        9           GNAT HPROM                     —               —                 —                     —
of the various constructed                          Collocation HPROM              113             125               94.4                  103
least-squares PG-hyper-reduced
                                                    ECSW HPROM                     0.891           2.45              16.2                  22.3
counterpart PROM
(LSPG-HPROMs)                           35          GNAT HPROM                     —               —                 —                     —
                                                    Collocation HPROM              6.94            125                5.84                 130.
                                                    ECSW HPROM                     0.130           2.86               1.65                 13.7

                                       Abbreviations: ECSW, energy-conserving sampling and weighting; GNAT, Gauss–Newton with approximated
                                       tensors; HPROM, hyper-reduced counterpart PROM.




    Using a single core of an Intel Xeon Gold 6128 processor running at 3.40 GHz on a machine equipped with 192 GB
of memory, the HDM-based simulation takes 65.4-h wall-clock time to complete. For n = 9 (n = 35), the construction on
the same processor of the ECSW reduced mesh is performed in 27.1 (78) min: 26.1 (67.8) min for forming the convex
optimization problem defined by (19) and (20), and 1.0 (10.2) min for solving it using the parallel NNLS algorithm.41 As
for the computational performance of each constructed ECSW-based HPROM, it is summarized in Table 3 below. For
n = 9, the reported wall-clock time speedup factors exceed four orders of magnitude; for n = 35, they exceed three orders
of magnitude.
1864                                                                                                                   GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                          10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                 (A)                                                                 (B)




                                 (C)                                                                (D)

F I G U R E 5 Two-dimensional flow problem over a right circular cylinder—snapshots of the solution vorticity computed at t = 50 using:
the high-dimensional computational model (A); least-squares PG (LSPG)-Gauss–Newton with approximated tensors (GNAT) hyper-reduced
counterpart PROM (HPROM) (B); LSPG-least-squares collocation HPROM (c); and the LSPG-ECSW HPROM


                                                            T A B L E 3 Two-dimensional flow problem over a right circular cylinder:
 n        Wall-clock time (s)          Speedup factor
                                                            computational performance of the ECSW-based LSPG HPROMs
 9         23.5                        1.00 × 104
 35       140.0                        1.68 × 103

Abbreviations: ECSW, energy-conserving sampling and
weighting; HPROM, hyper-reduced counterpart PROM; LSPG,
least-squares PG.




5.2        Turbulent flow in the wake of Ahmed body

5.2.1         High-dimensional model

The second application presented here concerns the DES-based numerical simulation of a turbulent flow past the Ahmed
body geometry—a popular benchmark CFD problem in the automotive industry.31 The considered flow problem is
for the slant angle of 20◦ , the free-stream velocity v∞ = 60 m/s, and the Reynolds number (based on the body length)
Re = 4.29 × 106 . For this problem, which has a symmetry plane, the computational domain associated with one half of the
model is shown in Figure 6. It is discretized by an unstructured CFD mesh with 2,890,434 vertices and 17,017,090 tetra-
hedral elements. Adiabatic boundary conditions are applied on all wall boundary surfaces of the computational domain
using Reichardt’s law of the wall. As previously mentioned, the DES approach is based here on the Spalart–Allmaras
one-equation model:46 therefore, the computational model has de = 6 DOFs per vertex, leading to a semi-discrete HDM
of dimension N = 17, 342, 604.
     The semi-discrete HDM is time-integrated using the implicit, second-order, three-point backward difference scheme
and the fixed computational time-step Δt = 8 × 10−5 s. The unsteady, HDM-based simulation is initialized using a
quasi-steady flow around the geometry at the same flow conditions outlined above in the time-interval [0, 2 × 10−1 ] s. It
is performed on 240 cores of a Linux cluster where each compute node is equipped with two 6-core Intel Xeon Gold 6128
processors running at 3.40 GHz and 192 GB of memory. Using this parallel computational platform, the HDM-based sim-
ulation takes 12.1-h wall-clock time to complete—which corresponds to an aggregate CPU time of 2.91 × 103 h. It predicts
the time-averaged drag coefficient cD = 0.263 – with time-averaging performed in the time-interval [5 × 10−2 , 2 × 10−1 ]
s, after the startup transients have vanished. This value of cD differs by just 3.1% from its experimental value
  exp
cD = 0.255.31
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                         1865




                                                                                                                               10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
FIGURE 6           Ahmed body wake flow problem: computational domain




            750                                                      2500
                                                    meank nk                  sumk nk
                                                    maxk nk
                                                    mink nk          2000
            500

                                                                     1500

            250
                                                                     1000



                  0                                                   500
                  100          101           102               103      100             101         102      103
                                       Nc                                                     Nc

                                      (A)                                                     (B)


F I G U R E 7 Ahmed body wake flow problem—variations with the number of clusters of: the mean, maximum, and minimum
reduced-order basis (ROB) dimensions (A); and the total number of ROB modes across all clusters (B)



5.2.2        Local ECSW-based hyper-reduced LSPG projection-based reduced-order models

For this problem, N s = 1251 HDM-based solution snapshots are collected in the time-interval [0, 2 × 10−1 ] s using
the sampling rate defined by Δs = 1.6 × 10−4 s. The k-means clustering algorithm is applied, along with the POD
method of snapshots, to construct piecewise-affine local approximation subspaces. To this end, various values of N c
in the range of 2–100 are considered (see below) and the overlapping factor in Algorithm 1 is set to 𝜙 = 0.1. For
the fixed singular value energy threshold of 99.99%, Figure 7 reports the variation with N c of the mean, maximum,
and minimum dimensions of the right ROBs defining the local approximation subspaces as well as the growth of
                                            ∑Nc
the total number of retained POD modes k=1       nk with the number of clusters N c . In general, choosing an appropri-
ate value for N c amounts to trading the part of the online cost associated with the assembly of the hyper-reduced
residual vector and Jacobian matrix, which scales linearly with nk , and the solution at each time-step of an implicit
time-integration scheme of the dense systems of algebraic equations incurred by Newton’s method, which scales as
O(n3k ), with the remaining part of the online cost, which scales as O(Nc2 ). More importantly, as N c is an input to
many standard clustering algorithms including the k-means algorithm considered here, it is desirable for the accu-
racy of the resulting local PROM to be largely insensitive to this parameter, in order to avoid as much as possible
its tuning. Therefore to verify this behavior, three different values of N c are considered here: N c = 10, N c = 50, and
N c = 100.
    To accelerate the processing of each constructed local LSPG PROM, the proposed ECSW framework is applied for
transforming such a PROM into an LSPG HPROM that employs the same time-discretization scheme as the HDM. Mesh
sampling is performed in this case using N H = 17 training residuals sampled in the same time-interval [0, 2 × 10−1 ] s with
ΔsH = 1.2 × 10−2 s. Table 4 reports for each considered value of N c , the mean, maximum, and minimum dimension of
each local ROB and the size Ñe of the reduced mesh defining the constructed ECSW-based LSPG HPROM. Note that when
N c > N H , the offline ECSW training procedure exploits data from only a subset of the N c clusters and therefore bets on
1866                                                                                                                      GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                            10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                                                        T A B L E 4 Ahmed body wake flow
 Nc        meank nk        maxk nk        mink nk        Ñe          Ñe ∕Ne (%)
                                                                                        problem—variations with the number of clusters
  10       85.3            229            44             1,620       0.056              of: the mean, maximum, and minimum ROB
  50       28.8              79           10               347       0.012              dimensions; and the size of the ECSW reduced
                                                                                        mesh
 100       10.8              19            5               137       0.0047




                                  (A)                                                                 (B)




                                  (C)                                                                 (D)

F I G U R E 8 Ahmed body wake flow problem—isosurfaces of the vorticity magnitude colored by the Mach number computed at
t = T f = 2 × 10−1 s using: the high-dimensional computational model (A); and the energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based local
least-squares PG hyper-reduced counterpart PROMs with N c = 10 (B), N c = 50 (C), and N c = 100 (D)



the fact that the reduced mesh constructed using this data will perform well for the local subspace approximations whose
data was not accounted for in the training process.


5.2.3         Performance of the ECSW hyperreduction method

Figure 8 displays snapshots of isosurfaces of the flow solution vorticity magnitude computed at the end of the simulation
time-interval t = T f = 2 × 10−1 s using the HDM and local ECSW-based LSPG HPROMs, and colored by the local Mach
number. The reader can observe that the local-HPROM-based solutions do not exhibit any major discrepancy with their
HDM-based counterparts: for each considered value of N c , they capture well the highly turbulent structures present in
the wake of the body.
    Figure 9 compares the time-histories computed using the HDM and local ECSW-based LSPG HPROMs of the lift
coefficient, drag coefficient, and streamwise and vertical velocity components at a probe located one half body length
downstream at half of the body height and along the body centerline. Again, the reader can observe that all constructed
local ECSW-based HPROMs perfectly reproduce the time-history of each considered QoI over the entire simulation
time-interval. These results suggest that the accuracy of the local ECSW-based HPROMs is largely insensitive to the choice
of N c > 1. For each QoI predicted using a local ECSW-based HPROM, the relative error computed using ΔsRE = Δt =
8 × 10−5 s is reported in Table 5. The reported errors demonstrate a high level of achieved accuracy and an insensitivity
with respect to the choice of N c . For the specified singular value energy threshold, a global ROB (N c = 1) would include
over 600 POD modes (see Figure 7); on the other hand, local subspace approximations enable the same level of accuracy
using a database of ROBs of much lower dimensions.
    For this application, all ECSW reduced meshes are constructed on 240 cores of the aforementioned Linux cluster:

• For N c = 10, the mesh sampling is performed in 34.8 min: 11.7 min for forming the convex optimization problem
  defined by (19) and (20), and 23.1 min for solving it using the parallel NNLS algorithm.41
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                                                 1867




                                                                                                                                                                       10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                  0.45                                                                    0.3
                                                        HDM
                                                        HPROM, Nc = 10
                                                                                      0.28
                                                        HPROM, Nc = 50
                  0.35                                  HPROM, Nc = 100
                                                                                      0.26




                                                                                 cD
             cL

                                                                                      0.24
                  0.25                                                                                                           HDM
                                                                                                                                 HPROM, Nc = 10
                                                                                      0.22                                       HPROM, Nc = 50
                                                                                                                                 HPROM, Nc = 100
                  0.15                                                                    0.2
                            0       0.05       0.1          0.15          0.2                    0      0.05            0.1          0.15          0.2
                                             Time (s)                                                                 Time (s)
                                                 (A)                                                                   (B)
                      1.2                                                                   1
                                                                                                     HDM
                                                                                                     HPROM, Nc = 10
                       1
                                                                                                     HPROM, Nc = 50
                                                                                          0.5        HPROM, Nc = 100
                      0.8
             vx / v




                                                                                 vz / v
                      0.6
                                HDM                                                         0
                                HPROM, Nc = 10
                      0.4       HPROM, Nc = 50
                                HPROM, Nc = 100
                      0.2                                                                 -0.5
                            0      0.05        0.1          0.15          0.2                    0      0.05            0.1          0.15          0.2
                                             Time (s)                                                                 Time (s)

                                                 (C)                                                                   (D)

F I G U R E 9 Ahmed body wake flow problem—time-histories computed using the high-dimensional computational model and various
constructed local energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based local least-squares PG hyper-reduced counterpart PROMs of: the lift
coefficient (A); drag coefficient (B); streamwise velocity component at a probe (C); and the normal velocity component at the same probe (D)




T A B L E 5 Ahmed body wake flow
                                                                           Nc              REcD (%)            REcL (%)            REvx (%)              REvy (%)
problem—computational accuracy of the various
constructed local least-squares PG hyper-reduced                            10             0.262               1.58                1.06                  5.33
counterpart PROMs                                                           50             0.419               2.18                1.17                  6.12
                                                                           100             0.212               1.35                0.839                 4.07




• For N c = 50, the mesh sampling is performed in 2.92 min: 0.95 min for forming the aforementioned convex optimization
  problem and 1.97 min for solving it using the parallel NNLS algorithm.
• For N c = 100, the mesh sampling is performed in 2.76 min: 2.06 min for forming the convex optimization problem and
  0.70 min for solving it using the same parallel algorithm.

    These performance results demonstrate that the proposed hyperreduction procedure is computationally tractable even
for a large-scale HDM.
    All HPROM-based simulations are performed on N cpu = 1, 2, 4, and 8 cores of a single node of the aforementioned
Linux cluster. Figure 10, which reports for each considered value of N c the obtained wall-clock time speedup factor,
demonstrates the scalability of the constructed ECSW-based LSPG HPROMs on up to 8 cores—despite the small sizes of
the considered HPROMs (see Table 4) leading to a slight flattening of the speedup curves at larger core counts. Table 6
focuses on the case N cpu = 8. It reports for this case the wall-clock execution time and both wall-clock time and CPU time
speedup factors delivered by all constructed ECSW-based LSPG HPROMs. The results show that all ECSW-based LSPG
1868                                                                                                                                                   GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                                                          10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                 104                                                    F I G U R E 10 Ahmed body wake flow problem – parallel scalability of the
                                                                                        constructed energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based energy-conserving
Wall-clock time speedup factor

                                                                                        sampling and weighting hyper-reduced counterpart PROMs and delivered
                                 103                                                    speedup factors with respect to the high-dimensional computational model (black
                                                                                        dashed lines represent the ideal speedup factors)

                                 102


                                                                       Nc = 10
                                 101
                                                                       Nc = 50
                                                                       Nc = 100
                                      0
                                 10
                                          1       2             4                 8
                                                         Ncpu




          T A B L E 6 Ahmed body wake flow problem – computational performance of the energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based
          least-squares PG hyper-reduced counterpart PROMs on N cpu = 8 cores: wall-clock execution time; and wall-clock time and CPU time
          speedup factors

                                 Nc              Wall-clock time (s)                  Wall-clock time speedup factor                CPU time speedup factor

                                  10             626.6                                6.97 × 101                                    2.09 × 103
                                  50              76.3                                5.72 × 102                                    1.72 × 104
                                 100              36.8                                1.19 × 103                                    3.56 × 104




HPROMs deliver excellent speedup factors – up to three orders of magnitude for the wall-clock time and exceeding four
orders of magnitude for the CPU time.


5.3    Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D Block 40 aircraft configuration at a high angle of
attack

5.3.1                                         High-dimensional model

The final application considered here focuses on the prediction of the turbulent flow past a configuration of the F-16C/D
Block 40 Fighting Falcon with external stores (see Figure 11) at the free-stream Mach number M ∞ = 0.3, 30◦ angle of
attack, and 10,000 ft altitude. For this geometry and flight conditions, the resulting Reynolds number based on the mean
aerodynamic chord of 11.32 ft is Re = 1.82 × 107 . Specifically, this aircraft configuration includes wing-tip launch rails
and four occupied under-wing stations, which adds to the complexity of the geometry, resulting unsteady flow field, and
resulting wake dynamics.
    As in the previous example, the flow is modeled here using a DES approach and only half of the geometry is considered
for the purpose of computational efficiency. Hence, a symmetry plane along the fuselage midsection is incorporated in the
computational model. Reichardt’s law of the wall is again employed for enforcing the adiabatic wall boundary conditions
on the aircraft surface to further limit the dimensionality of the HDM. The half-aircraft model surface is discretized using
575,951 vertices and 1,148,092 triangular elements. The computational domain around the aircraft is discretized by a CFD
mesh with 26,919,879 vertices and 158,954,429 tetrahedral elements, leading to an HDM of dimension N = 161, 519, 274.
    Time-discretization of the HDM is performed in the time-interval [0, 5 × 103 ] using a second-order DIRK scheme and
the fixed, nondimensional time-step Δt = 5 × 10−2 (note that T f = 5 × 103 corresponds in this case to the dimensional
value of 1.29 s). The initial condition is set to a computed quasi-steady flow around the aircraft geometry.
    Due to its very large scale, the HDM-based simulation is performed on 3,584 cores of the Frontera supercomputer at
The University of Texas at Austin. Each compute node of this supercomputed is equipped with two 26-core Intel Xeon
Platinum 8280 processors with a 2.70 GHz nominal clock speed and 192 GB of memory. The interconnect is based on
Mellanox HDR InfiniBand. Using this computing platform, the HDM-based simulation completes in 100.3-h wall-clock
time—or equivalently, 3.60 × 105 h CPU time.
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                   1869




                                                                                                                                         10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                      (A)                                                     (B)


F I G U R E 11    Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D aircraft – model geometry: top view (A); and underside view (B)



T A B L E 7 Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D
                                                         Nc       meank nk         maxk nk          mink nk        Ñe    Ñe ∕Ne (%)
aircraft: mean, maximum, and minimum ROB
dimensions of the constructed local approximation        50       53.7             115              26             787   0.0029
subspaces; and size of the energy-conserving
sampling and weighting reduced mesh



    In summary, this application is representative of industrial-scale CFD applications. The underlying CFD problem is
a showcase problem for demonstrating the feasibility of the offline part of the proposed hyperreduction method as well
as the potential of its online part for drastically accelerating DES simulations using LSPG HPROMs.


5.3.2        Local ECSW-based hyper-reduced LSPG projection-based reduced-order models

First, an LSPG PROM is constructed for this problem. For this purpose, HDM-based solution snapshots are collected in
the nondimensional time-interval [0, 5 × 103 ] using the nondimensional sampling rate defined by Δs = 1, resulting in the
storage of a total of N s = 5000 snapshots. Using the same procedure based on POD and the k-means clustering algorithm as
in the previous application (see Section 5.2), a piecewise-affine local subspace approximation with N c = 50 is constructed.
For the fixed singular value energy threshold of 99.99% and the overlapping factor 𝜙 = 0.1 in Algorithm 1, the resulting
mean, maximum, and minimum right ROB dimensions are reported in Table 7.
    Next, hyper-reduction is performed using the proposed ECSW method with N H = 21 training snapshots collected
for t ∈ [0, 5 × 103 ] using ΔsH = 250. The characteristics of the generated reduced mesh are summarized in Table 7. The
resulting ECSW-based LSPG HPROM is discretized using the same second-order DIRK time-integration scheme used for
discretizing the HDM. For this problem, the computational time-step of the HDM is not limited by the solution accuracy
but by its numerical stability. Since the ECSW-based LSPG HPROM is less stiff than its underlying HDM, its numerical
stability can sustain in this case a larger computational time-step. Consequently, the HPROM-based simulation is per-
formed using the nondimensional time-step Δt = 5 × 10−1 – that is, 10 times larger than its counterpart employed in the
HDM-based simulation.


5.3.3        Performance of the ECSW hyper-reduction method

Figures 12 and 13 compare isosurfaces of vorticity magnitude and visualizations of the flow Mach number in the wake of
the aircraft, respectively, computed at t = T f = 1.29 s using the results of the HDM-based and ECSW-based LSPG HPROM
simulations. They suggest that the ECSW-based LSPG HPROM is capable of reproducing the flow features captured by the
HDM. Figure 14, which contrasts the time-histories of the lift and drag coefficients computed using the HDM with their
counterparts computed using the ECSW-based LSPG HPROM, and Table 8, which reports the relative errors computed
using ΔsRE = 5 × 10−1 of the HPROM-based predictions of the lift and drag coefficients support this suggestion.
1870                                                                                                                      GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                             10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                (A)                                                                   (B)

F I G U R E 12      Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D aircraft – isosurfaces of the solution vorticity magnitude colored by Mach number
computed at t = T f = 1.29 s using: the high-dimensional computational model (A); and the energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based
least-squares PG hyper-reduced ROM (B)




                                (A)                                                                   (B)

F I G U R E 13        Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D aircraft – snapshots of the solution Mach number in the aircraft wake computed at
t = T f = 1.29 s using: the high-dimensional computational model (A); and the energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based least-squares
PG hyper-reduced ROM (B)



    For this problem, which features a CFD mesh with more than 25 million vertices (and thus more than 25 million FV
dual cells), ECSW generates the reduced mesh in 30.6 min on 3548 cores of the Frontera supercomputer: 14.6 min of these
are elapsed in forming the convex optimization problem defined by (19) and (20), and the other 16 min are consumed
by the parallel NNLS algorithm41 for solving this problem. In order to highlight the fact that even very-low-dimensional
computations can be parallelized to some degree, the HPROM-based simulation is repeated on N cpu = 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32
cores of a single node of the Frontera supercomputer. The obtained performance results are reported in Figure 15, which
highlights the parallel scalability of the ECSW-based LSPG HPROM – due to the concept of a reduced mesh described in
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                                                                  1871




                                                                                                                                                                                         10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                   1.8                                                         1



                                                                             0.96
                   1.7




                                                                        cD
              cL
                                                                             0.92


                   1.6
                                                                             0.88
                                                               HDM                                                                                           HDM
                                                               HPROM                                                                                         HPROM
                   1.5                                                       0.84
                         0     0.2   0.4    0.6     0.8    1      1.2               0   0.2                                    0.4    0.6     0.8        1         1.2
                                           Time (s)                                                                                  Time (s)

                                               (A)                                                                                    (B)


F I G U R E 14    Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D aircraft: time-histories of the lift and drag coefficients computed using the
high-dimensional computational model and energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based least-squares PG hyper-reduced ROM



T A B L E 8 Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D aircraft: computational accuracy of the
                                                                                                                                      Nc            REcD (%)             REcL (%)
energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based least-squares PG hyper-reduced counterpart
PROM                                                                                                                                  50            0.489                0.459



F I G U R E 15    Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D aircraft: parallel scalability of                                       104
the energy-conserving sampling and weighting-based least-squares PG
hyper-reduced counterpart PROM and delivered wall-clock time speedup factors            Wall-clock time speedup factor

                                                                                                                         103




                                                                                                                         102




                                                                                                                         101
                                                                                                                               1       2            4          8          16        32
                                                                                                                                                        Ncpu




    T A B L E 9 Turbulent flow past an F-16C/D aircraft – computational performance of the ECSW-based LSPG HPROM on N cpu = 32
    cores: wall-clock execution time; and wall-clock time and CPU time speedup factors

     Nc                  Wall-clock time (s)              Wall-clock time speedup factor                                                   CPU time speedup factor
                                                                  3
     50                  346                              1.04 × 10                                                                        1.17 × 105




Section 4—and Table 9, which reports for N cpu = 32 cores a wall-clock time speedup factor of three orders of magnitude
and a CPU time speedup factor of five orders of magnitude.


6         CO N C LUSION S

In this paper, the ECSW hyper-reduction method—one of the most popular hyper-reduction methods of the
project-then-approximate type developed for accelerating Galerkin PMOR methods—is extended to PG PMOR meth-
ods. Its computational framework is also generalized to cover not only FE spatial discretizations, but also FV
and FD semi-discretization methods. Its scope is extended to PMOR methods based on local, piecewise-affine
1872                                                                                                                        GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                               10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
approximation subspaces designed for addressing the Kolmogorov n-width barrier issue associated with many
highly nonlinear problems such as high-speed, convection-dominated flow problems. For large-scale turbulent flow
problems with O(107 ) and O(108 ) DOFs, the offline part of the resulting ECSW method is shown to be not
only computationally tractable, but also computationally fast. For such large-scale applications, the online part
of the resulting ECSW method for PG PMOR methods is also demonstrated to be robust, accurate, and most
importantly, to enable wall-clock time and CPU time speedup factors of several orders of magnitude. In future
work, evaluating the performance of the proposed framework for parametric, time-dependent applications will be
addressed.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Sebastian Grimberg, Radek Tezaur, and Charbel Farhat acknowledge partial support by the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research under grant FA9550-17-1-0182, partial support by the Office of Naval Research under Grant
N00014-17-1-2749, partial support by a research grant from the King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology
(KACST), and partial support by The Boeing Company under Contract Sponsor Ref. 45047. All authors acknowl-
edge the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin for providing computing
resources that have contributed to producing the numerical results reported in this paper. This document however
does not necessarily reflect the position of any of these institutions and therefore no official endorsement should be
inferred.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

ORCID
Sebastian Grimberg https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9188-0562
Charbel Farhat https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2563-8820

REFERENCES
 1. Antoulas AC. Approximation of Large-Scale Dynamical Systems. SIAM Advances in Design and Control. Vol 6. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM;
    2005.
 2. Benner P, Gugercin S, Willcox KE. A survey of projection-based model reduction methods for parametric dynamical systems. SIAM Rev.
    2015;57(4):483-531.
 3. Rowley CW, Colonius T, Murray RM. Model reduction for compressible flows using POD and Galerkin projection. Phys D Nonlinear
    Phenomena. 2004;189:115-129.
 4. Barbič J, James DL. Real-time subspace integration for St. Venant-Kirchoff deformable models. ACM Trans Graph. 2005;24(3):
    982-990.
 5. Nguyen NC, Veroy K, Patera AT. Certified real-time solution of parametrized partial differential equations. In: Yip S, ed. Handbook of
    Materials Modeling. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer; 2005:1529-1564.
 6. Kramer B, Willcox KE. Nonlinear model order reduction via lifting transformations and proper orthogonal decomposition. AIAA J.
    2019;57(6):2297-2307.
 7. Farhat C, Grimberg S, Manzoni A, Quateroni A. Computational bottlenecks for PROMs: pre-computation and hyperreduction. In: Ben-
    ner P, Grivet-Talocia S, Quateroni A, Rozza G, Schilders W, Silveira LM, eds. Model Order Reduction: Snapshot-Based Methods and
    Algorithms. Vol 2. Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter; 2020.
 8. Everson R, Sirovich L. Karhunen-Loève procedure for gappy data. J Opt Soc Am A. 1995;12(8):1657-1664.
 9. Barrault M, Maday Y, Nguyen NC, Patera AT. An ’empirical interpolation’ method: application to efficient reduced-basis discretization of
    partial differential equations. Comptes Rendus Mathematique. 2004;339(9):667-672.
10. Grepl MA, Maday Y, Nguyen NC, Patera AT. Efficient reduced-basis treatment of nonaffine and nonlinear partial differential equations.
    ESIAM Math Model Numer Anal. 2007;41(3):575-605.
11. Nguyen NC, Patera AT, Peraire J. A ‘best points’ interpolation method for efficient approximation of parametrized functions. Int J Numer
    Methods Eng. 2008;73(4):521-543.
12. Astrid P, Weiland S, Willcox KE, Backx T. Missing point estimation in models described by proper orthogonal decomposition. IEEE Trans
    Autom Control. 2008;53(10):2237-2251.
13. Ryckelynck D. A priori hyperreduction method: an adaptive approach. J Comput Phys. 2005;202(1):346-366.
14. Ryckelynck D. Hyper-reduction of mechanical models involving internal variables. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2009;77(1):75-89.
15. Chaturantabut S, Sorensen DC. Nonlinear model reduction via discrete empirical interpolation. SIAM J Sci Comput. 2010;32(5):
    2737-2764.
GRIMBERG et al.                                                                                                                                1873




                                                                                                                                                       10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
16. Tiso P, Rixen DJ. Discrete empirical interpolation method for finite element structural dynamics. In: Kerschen G, Adams D, Carrella A,
    eds. Topics in Nonlinear Dynamics. New York, NY: Springer; 2013:203-212.
17. Peherstorfer B, Butnaru D, Willcox KE, Bungartz H-J. Localized discrete empirical interpolation method. SIAM J Sci Comput.
    2014;36(1):A168-A192.
18. An SS, Kim T, James DL. Optimizing cubature for the efficient integration of subspace deformations. ACM Trans Graph.
    2008;27(5):165.1-165.10.
19. Farhat C, Avery P, Chapman T, Cortial J. Dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models with finite rotations and
    energy-based mesh sampling and weighting for computational efficiency. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2014;98(9):625-662.
20. Hernández JA, Ciacedo MA, Ferrer A. Dimensional hyper-reduction of nonlinear finite element models via empirical cubature. Comput
    Methods Appl Mech Eng. 2017;313:687-722.
21. Yano M, Patera AT. An LP empirical cubature procedure for reduced basis treatment of parametrized nonlinear PDEs. Comput Methods
    Appl Mech Eng. 2019;344:1104-1123.
22. Farhat C, Chapman T, Avery P. Structure-preserving, stability, and accuracy properties of the energy-conserving sampling and weighting
    method for the hyper reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2015;102(5):1077-1110.
23. Carlberg K, Bou-Mosleh C, Farhat C. Efficient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares Petrov-Galerkin projection and compressive
    tensor approximations. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2011;86(2):155-181.
24. Carlberg K, Farhat C, Cortial J, Amsallem D. The GNAT method for nonlinear model reduction: effective implementation and application
    to computational fluid dynamics and turbulent flows. J Comput Phys. 2013;242:623-647.
25. LeGresley PA. Application of Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) to Design Decomposition Methods [PhD thesis]. Stanford, CA:
    Stanford University; 2006.
26. Washabaugh K, Zahr MJ, Farhat C. On the use of discrete nonlinear reduced-order models for the prediction of steady-state flows past
    parametrically deformed complex geometries. Paper presented at: Proceedings of the 54th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting; 2016; San
    Diego, CA.
27. Zahr MJ. Adaptive Model Reduction to Accelerate Optimization Problems Governed by Partial Differential Equations [PhD thesis].
    Stanford, CA: Stanford University; 2016.
28. Grimberg S, Farhat C, Youkilis N. On the stability of projection-based model order reduction for convection-dominated laminar and
    turbulent flows. J Comput Phys. 2020;419:109681.
29. Pinkus A. n-Widths in Approximation Theory. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics. Vol 7. Berlin: Springer; 1985.
30. Amsallem D, Farhat C. Stabilization of projection-based reduced-order models. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2012;91(4):358-377.
31. Ahmed SR, Ramm G, Faitin G. Some Salient Features of the Time-averaged Ground Vehicle Wake. SAE Technical Paper 840300; 1984.
32. Amsallem D, Zahr MJ, Farhat C. Nonlinear model order reduction based on local reduced-order bases. Int J Numer Methods Eng.
    2012;92(10):891-916.
33. Bui-Thanh T, Willcox KE, Ghattas O. Model reduction for large-scale systems with high-dimensional parametric input space. SIAM J Sci
    Comput. 2008;30(6):3270-3288.
34. Drohmann M, Haasdonk B, Ohlberger M. Adaptive reduced basis methods for nonlinear convection-diffusion equations empirical inter-
    polation method for finite element structural dynamics. In: Fǒrt J, Fürst J, Halama J, Herbin R, Hubert F, eds. Finite Volumes for Complex
    Applications VI Problems & Perspectives. Springer Proceedings in Mathematics. Vol 4. Berlin, Germany: Springer; 2011:369-377.
35. Haasdonk B, Dihlmann M, Ohlberger M. A training set and multiple bases generation approach for parameterized model reduction based
    on adaptive grids in parameter space. Math Comput Model Dyn Syst. 2011;17(4):423-442.
36. He W, Avery P, Farhat C. In-situ adaptive reduction of nonlinear multiscale structural dynamics models; 2020. arXiv:2004.00153.
37. Washabaugh K, Zahr MJ, Farhat C. Nonlinear model reduction for CFD problems using local reduced order bases. Paper presented at:
    Proceedings of the 42nd AIAA Fluid Dynamics Conference and Exhibit; 2012; New Orleans, LA.
38. Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Springer Series in Statistics.
    New York, NY: Springer; 2009.
39. Bezdek J, Ehrlich R, Full W. FCM: the fuzzy c-means clustering algorithm. Comput Geosci. 1984;10(2–3):191-203.
40. Farhat C, Tezaur R, Chapman T, Avery P, Soize C. Feasible probabilistic learning method for model-form uncertainty quantification in
    vibration analysis. AIAA J. 2019;57(11):4978-4991.
41. Chapman C, Avery P, Collins P, Farhat C. Accelerated mesh sampling for the hyper reduction of nonlinear computational models. Int
    J Numer Methods Eng. 2017;109(12):1623-1654.
42. Lawson CL, Hanson RJ. Solving Least Squares Problems. Classics in Applied Mathematics. Vol 15. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM; 1995.
43. Ohlberger M, Rave S. Reduced basis methods: success, limitations and future challenges. In: Handlovičová A, Ševčovič D, eds. Proceedings
    of ALGORITMY . Vol 2016. Bratislava: Publishing House of Slovak University of Technology; 2016:1-12.
44. Anderson WK, Thomas JL, Leer B. Comparison of finite volume flux vector splittings for the Euler equations. AIAA J.
    1986;24(9):1453-1460.
45. Farhat C, Fezoui L, Lanteri S. Two-dimensional viscous flow computations on the connection machine: unstructured meshes, upwind
    schemes and massively parallel computations. Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng. 1993;102(1):61-88.
46. Strelets M. Detached eddy simulation of massively separated flows. Paper presented at: Proceedings of the 39th AIAA Aerospace Sciences
    Meeting and Exhibit; 2001; Reno, NV.
47. Cai X-C, Farhat C, Sarkis M. A minimum overlap restricted additive Schwarz preconditioner and applications in 3D flow simulations.
    Contemp Math. 1998;218:479-485.
1874                                                                                                               GRIMBERG et al.




                                                                                                                                     10970207, 2021, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6603 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
48. Wieselsberger C. New data on the laws of fluid resistance. NACA TN 84; 1922.
49. Henderson RD. Details of the drag curve near the onset of vortex shedding. Phys Fluids. 1995;7(9):2102-2104.




   How to cite this article: Grimberg S, Farhat C, Tezaur R, Bou-Mosleh C. Mesh sampling and weighting for the
   hyperreduction of nonlinear Petrov–Galerkin reduced-order models with local reduced-order bases. Int J Numer
   Methods Eng. 2021;122:1846–1874. https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.6603
