Received: 23 March 2020     Revised: 6 June 2020   Accepted: 7 July 2020

DOI: 10.1002/nme.6505


RESEARCH ARTICLE




In situ adaptive reduction of nonlinear multiscale
structural dynamics models

Wanli He1               Philip Avery2               Charbel Farhat1,2,3

1
 Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, California,         Summary
USA                                                Conventional offline training of reduced-order bases in a predetermined region
2
 Department of Aeronautics and                     of a parameter space leads to parametric reduced-order models that are vul-
Astronautics, Stanford University,
                                                   nerable to extrapolation. This vulnerability manifests itself whenever a queried
Stanford, California, USA
3
 Institute for Computational and
                                                   parameter point lies in an unexplored region of the parameter space. This article
Mathematical Engineering, Huang                    addresses this issue by presenting an in situ, adaptive framework for nonlin-
Engineering Center, Stanford, California,          ear model reduction where computations are performed by default online and
USA
                                                   shifted offline as needed. The framework is based on the concept of a database
Correspondence                                     of local reduced-order bases (ROBs), where locality is defined in the parame-
Philip Avery, Department of Aeronautics
                                                   ter space of interest. It achieves accuracy by updating on-the-fly a precomputed
and Astronautics, Stanford University,
Durand Building, 496 Lomita Mall,                  ROB and approximating the solution of a dynamical system along its trajectory
Stanford, CA 94305-4035.                           using a sequence of most appropriate local ROBs. It achieves efficiency by man-
Email: pavery@stanford.edu
                                                   aging the dimension of a local ROB and incorporating hyperreduction in the
Funding information                                process. While sufficiently comprehensive, the framework is described in the
Air Force Office of Scientific Research,           context of dynamic multiscale computations in solid mechanics. In this con-
Grant/Award Number: FA9550-17-1-
0182; King Abdulaziz City for Science and
                                                   text, even in a nonparametric setting of the macroscale problem and when all
Technology (KACST); National                       offline, online, and adaptation overhead costs are accounted for, the proposed
Aeronautics and Space Administration,              computational framework can accelerate a single three-dimensional, nonlin-
Grant/Award Number:
NASA-NNX17AD02G                                    ear, multiscale computation by an order of magnitude, without compromising
                                                   accuracy.

                                                   KEYWORDS
                                                   dynamics, hyperreduction, local reduced-order basis, multiscale, nonlinear model reduction,
                                                   parameter sampling




1         I N T RO DU CT ION

Heterogeneous materials are encountered to an increasing extent in simulation-based engineering applications involving
structural analysis of solids. Applications include, but are not limited to, advanced modular armor protection,1 design
of new materials with special-purpose optimized properties,2 and bone fracture risk assessment.3 When the scale of the
heterogeneity is such that multiple disparate spatial scales require resolution in order to achieve a reliable prediction,
multiscale homogenization can be a viable alternative to prohibitively expensive direct numerical simulation involving a
massive monolithic discretization.4
    In principle, the method of multiscale homogenization assumes that the material configuration is homogeneous at
the macroscale level, but heterogeneous at the level of the smallest represented scale. The evaluation of a conventional

Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2020;121:4971–4988.             wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/nme                       © 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.   4971
                                                                                                                                  10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4972                                                                                                                  HE et al.



constitutive response function at each macroscale material point is replaced by the solution of a discrete boundary value
problem (BVP) whose computational domain is a so-called microscale representative volume element (RVE) character-
izing the microstructure. The complete BVP is formulated with prescribed boundary deformations corresponding to the
deformation gradient at the macroscale material point. The sequence of scales is coupled by formalized procedures of
localization and homogenization to transmit information between differing scales.5-8 In this work, a particular variant of
the method of multiscale homogenization known as “finite element squared” or FE2 is considered as a starting point. As
the name implies, in this variant the finite element (FE) method is used to discretize both the macroscopic computational
domain and the microscale RVE. The repeated solution of the FE BVP at each material point is an acknowledged compu-
tational bottleneck, motivating the development of alternative surrogate models to accelerate this task. Projection-based
model order reduction (PMOR) equipped with a second-tier hyperreduction approximation is one established technique
for reducing the computational complexity of nonlinear FE models that has recently been demonstrated to be an effec-
tive candidate surrogate model in the context of multiscale homogenization.9 Alternative surrogate model candidates
include regression-based models constructed using various methods including Kriging and artificial neural networks.10,11
Such methods can potentially lead to more computationally efficient surrogate model evaluation compared with PMOR;
however, a large amount of data may be required to train the model when the constitutive response is complex. To
accelerate the acquisition of training data, PMOR again presents a useful computational technology. In this work, a multi-
fidelity framework leveraging low-, medium- and high-fidelity models is proposed to achieve a computationally tractable
end-to-end procedure for nonlinear multiscale simulations. The proposed framework features a novel in situ construction
and utilization of an adaptive PMOR to eliminate computation bottlenecks. The usefulness of this novelty is not restricted
to the current application of interest (ie, multiscale modeling); benefits are anticipated in other related processes such as
multifidelity optimization. It is therefore presented in what follows as a general-purpose methodology.
    PMOR is typically embedded in an offline-online computational framework. In the phase of non-time-critical, offline
training, information data from a high dimensional model (HDM) are collected and used to construct a reduced-order
basis (ROB)—for example, using proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) and the method of snapshots12 —and the cor-
responding projection-based reduced order model (PROM). Then, in the phase of time-critical, online evaluation, an
approximate solution is computed using the PROM as a surrogate model for the underlying HDM. This offline-online
decomposition of the computational effort is appropriate in real-time applications that are performed for the exploration
of a space of interest associated with some usually but not necessarily physical model parameters, such as in design
optimization,13,14 uncertainty quantification,15,16 and repeated analysis.17,18 In these cases where the space of one or more
physical macroscopic parameters (such as those defining the geometry, boundary/initial conditions, or material proper-
ties) is explored, the offline cost is amortized by the sizable number of required analyses associated with the number of
parameter points necessary to adequately perform this exploration. Consequently, the overall speedup can still be sig-
nificant even when the potentially substantial offline cost is accounted for. However, not all applications require the
exploration of a space of one or more macroscopic parameters. In particular, the worst-case scenario in terms of opportu-
nity for amortization of the offline cost is when only a single multiscale simulation is required. Here, it is emphasized that
in the context of multiscale homogenization, PMOR is computationally feasible even in such a so-called “nonparamet-
ric setting,” due to the large number of microscale RVE simulations that are required at a single macroscopic parameter
point. Hence, a desirable speedup of the multiscale computations can be still achieved by building PROMs for all smaller
scales. Furthermore, a nonparametric application calls for an in situ alternative to the conventional offline-online strat-
egy, where the construction and utilization of the hyperreduced PROM (HPROM) can be performed during the multiscale
simulation without requiring any preliminary computational work, using solution snapshots collected during already
performed microscale RVE computations.
    Several existing PMOR methods have been previously developed and applied to the solution of nonlinear multiscale
problems. In Reference 19, a PROM of the microscale problem was constructed based on an a priori training strategy
that involved computing solution snapshots using predefined microstrain histories. This approach was subsequently
extended in Reference 20 to formulations with periodic boundary conditions for the microscale model. However, in each
of these works the PROMs were not equipped with a hyperreduction method, and consequently the resulting speedup
factor was limited to about an order of magnitude, even without accounting for the offline costs. More recently, the
coauthors of Reference 9 introduced a nonlinear PMOR framework incorporating the energy conserving sampling and
weighting (ECSW) hyperreduction method,21,22 which significantly reduced the computational cost of multiscale prob-
lems characterized by large deformations and material nonlinearity, including when the offline costs were taking into
account. Specifically, the computational framework proposed in Reference 9 included a two-step training strategy where:
a microscale HPROM is first constructed in situ in order to achieve significant speedups even in nonparametric settings;
                                                                                                                                   10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                   4973



next, a conventional offline-online training approach is performed to build a parametric macroscale HPROM. A notable
feature of this approach is the reduction in the cost of the training by using the in situ microscale HPROM to accelerate
macroscale snapshot acquisition. However, a weakness of the proposed framework is its vulnerability to extrapolation if
the underlying approximation subspace is not sufficiently explored during the in situ training phase.
    The alternative in situ training strategy proposed in this article avoids extrapolation by incorporating an adaptive
HPROM construction based on the concept of a database of local reduced-order bases (ROBs) constructed and updated
on-the-fly. This process treats the components of the deformation gradient as a parameter vector, which facilitates the
locating of each microscale BVP within the database in order to assign to it online the most-appropriate local ROB. Accu-
racy is optimized by collecting new snapshots and other additional information as needed and updating accordingly the
local ROBs. This usage of local ROBs enables the efficient solution of difficult problems for which PMOR is not effectively
performed by constructing a single global ROB. Note that locality in this article refers to the parameter space character-
ized by the deformation gradient, in sharp contrast with previous works where locality was considered with respect to
the solution manifold.23
    The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief summary of the FE2 multiscale homog-
enization method. Section 3 introduces the microscale HPROM and its training strategy. This section also highlights the
necessity for ROB adaptation to avoid extrapolation. Section 4 proposes a novel, online, in situ ROB adaptation approach
suitable for nonlinear, multifidelity, multiscale, computational homogenization. Section 5 provides an assessment of the
overall proposed adaptive PMOR framework using several representative applications and demonstrates its ability to
deliver speedups while compromising neither stability nor accuracy.


2           T H E FE 2 CO MPUTAT IONAL FRAMEWORK

In this section a brief summary of the FE2 method is provided, focusing on the aspects that are relevant to subse-
quent developments including notation. For a comprehensive formulation of multiscale homogenization, the interested
reader is referred to Reference 9 and the references cited therein. The fundamental generalization underlying FE2
is that the evaluation of stress as a function of strain for a heterogeneous material is governed by the solution of a
locally attached boundary value problem characterizing its microstructure. This concept can be applied recursively to
materials that exhibit ns + 1 separated scales. In the present context, this means that the dominant wavelengths at the
larger of two separated scales are much larger than the characteristic dimensions of the attached RVE. In what follows
k = 0, … , ns denotes the sequence of scales (or levels), with k = 0 and k = 1, … , ns designating the macroscale and the
finer meso/microscales, respectively. Specifically, at the ns coarsest scales (k = 0, … , ns − 1) each stress-strain relation is
associated with a locally attached microstructure, while at the finest scale (k = ns ) the stress-strain relation is defined by
a conventional constitutive law.


2.1          Semidiscrete governing equations

In this work, a distinction is made between constrained and unconstrained degrees of freedom (DOFs), the former being
those whose values are specified by essential boundary conditions, while the latter are subject to no such restriction.
                                          ◦
Following the notation of Reference 9, vk is defined here as a vector over the set of constrained DOFs at level k, vk as
the corresponding vector over the set of unconstrained DOFs at level k, and vk as the concatenation of these two vectors.
A similar notation is adopted for matrices. It follows that a subscript 0 attached to any vector or matrix designates a
                                                               ◦̈
macroscopic quantity. Using this notation and assuming that u0 = 0, the semidiscrete form of the equations of motion
governing dynamic equilibrium can be written as

                                                                      ◦
                                                    M0 ü 0 + f0 (u0 , u0 ) = 0,
                                                                      ◦
                                                              fk (uk , uk ) = 0,                                            (1)

for k = 1, … , ns , where M is a FE mass matrix, f is a FE vector of internal forces, u and ü are FE vectors of displace-
ments and accelerations, respectively. The governing equations (1) are coupled by the localization and homogenization
conditions presented in the next section.
                                                                                                                                  10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4974                                                                                                                  HE et al.



2.2        Scale transmission conditions

Kinematic information is transmitted from coarser to finer scales via prescribed nonhomogeneous displacement bound-
ary conditions applied to the exterior boundary of the attached microstructure. These prescribed values are specified such
that the volumetric average of the deformation gradient at the finer scale is identical to the deformation gradient at the
material point of the coarser scale to which the microstructure is attached. This is referred to as the localization condition
and can be expressed as follows
                                                    ◦         ◦
                                                    Uk+1 = Xk+1 (Fk − I),                                                   (2)
                                                                                            ◦
where F k is the coarse-scale deformation gradient, I is the 3 × 3 identity matrix, and Uk+1 is the matrix whose three
columns contain the prescribed x-, y-, and z-components of displacement. In other words, the displacement vector over
                                              ◦                                                                         ◦
the set of constrained DOFs at level k + 1, uk+1 , is obtained—up to a permutation—by stacking the columns of Uk+1 .
           ◦
Similarly, Xk+1 is the matrix whose three columns contain the x-, y-, and z-coordinates in the reference configuration of
the nodes on the exterior boundary of the attached microstructure whose DOFs are constrained. In the particular case
of the so-called uniform essential boundary conditions, the values of all DOFs located on the exterior boundary of the
attached microstructure are prescribed. Alternatively, in the case of periodic boundary conditions, only a minimal set of
corner points have prescribed displacements while the remaining exterior boundary DOFs are constrained using linear
multipoint constraint equations to enforce the periodicity of the fluctuations between each pair of opposite faces.
    After computing the response of an attached microstructure to the prescribed boundary displacements, information is
transmitted back from finer to coarser scales in the form of a homogenized stress tensor defined as the volumetric average
of the stress in the attached microstructure, that is,

                                                           1
                                                  Pk =                 Pk+1 dV,                                             (3)
                                                         |k+1 | ∫k+1

where Pk is the coarse-scale homogenized first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor and |k+1 | is the volume of the RVE. Pro-
vided that the interfaces are perfectly bounded within the microstructure,10 this quantity can be conveniently obtained
from the reaction forces associated with the constrained boundary DOFs using a discrete (matrix) form derived from (3).
Specifically,

                                                                           ◦
                                                             1
                                                   Pk =              XTk+1 Rk+1 ,                                           (4)
                                                           |k+1 |
       ◦
where Rk+1 is the matrix whose three columns contain the x-, y-, and z-components of the internal force vector of the
nodes on the exterior boundary of the attached microstructure whose DOFs are constrained, that is, the boundary reaction
forces.
    In summary, the multiscale computational model distinguishes itself from a conventional FE model in that it involves
repeatedly solving one or more microscale BVPs, with one such solution required for each stress-strain evaluation at
all scales other than the finest. For a given RVE, the microscale BVPs vary only in the values of the prescribed bound-
ary displacements. Regardless of whether uniform or periodic boundary conditions are adopted, (2) shows that the
computational response of the microscale model can be characterized as an implicit function of nine components of
the deformation gradient F k − 1 . In Section 4, the set of components of F k − 1 is treated as a parameter vector as in
the parametric setting of PMOR. The parameter space k ⊂ Rnsd , where nsd = 4 for two-dimensional problems, nsd = 9
for three-dimensional ones, and Fk−1 ∈ k , is explored by solving the microscale BVP repeatedly in order to generate
snapshots of the microstructural response as required for the construction of a surrogate model.
                                                                                 ∏ns −1
    At each computational time-step of a single multiscale simulation, a total of k=0   |k | high-dimensional, microscale
BVPs are solved at the finest scale, where |k | denotes the number of Gauss points at level k. The overall computa-
tional cost associated with such a computational complexity can be prohibitive for large-scale multiscale models, which
motivates PMOR to truncate the computational complexity by reducing the operational dimensionality of the multiscale
model. Even in the absence of a physical parametric setting at the macroscale level, computational savings are still fea-
sible if the macroscale model is not reduced, but rather a sequence of HPROMs are constructed at all other scales k,
                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                 4975



k = 1, … , ns . For this setting, the coauthors of Reference 9 proposed an in situ training strategy for microscale reduction
where only the single multiscale simulation of interest is required to be performed, without any predefined offline com-
putational work. This methodology will be described in the following section, after which a novel contribution will be
presented to extend the scope and robustness of the in situ concept without sacrificing its inherent convenience.


3           PROJECTION-BASED MODEL O RDER REDUCTION

Here, the application of PMOR to the FE2 computation framework is reviewed. Specifically, the POD reduction and
ECSW21,22 hyperreduction methods are used to construct a surrogate model to accelerate the solution of each locally
attached microstructural FE model at all fine scales (k = 1, … , ns ). Training is performed in situ (or on-the-fly), pursuant
to our objective of enabling a computational technology for multiscale modeling that is tractable, robust, and convenient
for simulators accustomed to conventional materials. Although not considered in what follows, PMOR can also be applied
to the macroscale BVP (k = 0, see9 ).


3.1          Microscale reduction framework

At each fine scale k, k = 1, … , ns , the number of DOFs ndk of the computational FE model is reduced by searching for the
solution uk of the problem of interest in a low-dimensional subspace—that is,

                                                                  uk ≈ Vk yk ,                                             (5)
                d
where Vk ∈ Rnk ×sk is a ROB constructed using POD and the method of snapshots,12 yk ∈ Rsk is a vector of generalized
coordinates, and sk ≪ ndk . The snapshots from which the ROB is constructed correspond to high-dimensional solutions
of the microstructural FE model that are collected and processed in situ. The term in situ indicates that such solutions
are obtained during the same multiscale simulation in which the model reduction framework is utilized, in contrast to
online-offline treatments.
    The dimensionality of the semidiscrete equations governing the microscale BVP (1) is reduced by performing a
Galerkin projection—that is, substituting (5) into these equations and premultiplying them by the transpose of V k . This
leads to the microscale PROM
                                                                 ◦
                                              VTk fk (Vk yk , uk ) = 0,            k = 1, … , ns ,                         (6)

where the superscript T designates the transpose operation.
     Furthermore, a second-tier hyperreduction approximation is also introduced to avoid computations that scale with
the size ndk of the HDM at each level k > 0. In this work, the ECSW method21,22 is preferred for this purpose due to
its structure-preserving property22 and the simplicity by which its approximation error can be controlled, namely, via a
user-specified thresholding parameter. As the name suggests, ECSW samples a subset ̃ k of the element set k of a given
FE mesh—that is, ̃ k ⊂ k —and assigns to each sampled element e a positive weight 𝛼ke ≥ 0. The internal force term in
the microscale PROM (6) is evaluated by simply weighting the contributions of the sampled elements only, that is,

                                                 ◦          ∑                                 ◦e                ◦
                                  VTk fk (Vk yk , uk ) ≈              𝛼ke (Vke )T fke (Vek yk , uk ) = fkr (yk , uk ).     (7)
                                                           e ∈ ̃ k


   In the above expressions, the superscript e designates the restriction of a global vector or matrix to element
e. The optimal reduced mesh ̃ k and associated weights can be estimated using either the non-negative least
squares (NNLS) algorithm proposed by Lawson and Hanson24 or alternative sparsity promoting L1-minimization
methods.25
   In the context of the microscale reduction framework, reduction and hyperreduction are considered not only for the
unconstrained part of the internal force vector as shown in (7) but also for both the constrained part of the internal force
required for the homogenization condition and the linear constraint equations required for the enforcement of periodic
boundary conditions.9
                                                                                                                                  10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4976                                                                                                                  HE et al.



3.2       In situ training strategy

As already stated in Section 2, the deformation gradient F k − 1 at a Gauss point characterizes the microscale BVP at level
k, k = 1, … , ns . In what follows, each microscale BVP at level k is associated with a parameter vector zk in the parameter
space k ⊂ Rsd (also referred to in the remainder of this section as parameter “point” in k ), where zk is obtained by
stacking the columns of F k − 1 . This parametric interpretation of the attached microstructure BVPs motivates the adaptive
reduction process discussed in Section 4.
                                                                          ∏k−1
    At each computational time-step of a multiscale simulation, j=0 |j | microscale BVPs are solved at level k,
k = 1, … , ns . This suggests that sufficient training data can be acquired for the purpose of constructing a PROM at each
level k, k = 1, … , ns . An in situ microscale training strategy proposed in Reference 9 that leverages this observation can
be described by the following steps:

1. Solve at level k, k = 1, … , ns , a sufficient number nk−1 of high-dimensional microscale BVPs encountered at the Gauss
   points of level k − 1, and sample the resulting solution snapshots (note that nk is not necessarily equal to |k |). Such
   problems are for example solved during the first few time-steps of the multiscale simulation.
2. Construct a global ROB V k .
3. Construct a reduced mesh ̃ k .
4. Exploit the resulting HPROM at level k to solve all remaining microscale BVPs at this level.

    This nonadaptive, in situ, microscale training strategy, where the choice for nk−1 is user-specified (and therefore arbi-
trary), may encounter scenarios involving extrapolation when the remaining microscale BVPs visit an unexplored region
of the parameter space k . If a queried parameter point falls outside of the subregion defined by the set of sampled points,
a good approximate solution of the microscale BVP may not be computable in the existing low-dimensional subspace V k .
However, an adaptive in situ training strategy has the potential to avoid extrapolation by collecting new high-dimensional
solution snapshots and using them to enrich the subspace of approximation when a scenario that would otherwise involve
extrapolation is detected.
    Typically, the enrichment of the approximation subspace needed when the explored domain within k is enlarged
requires the expansion of the dimension of the ROB, leading to a deterioration in the attainable speedup. When the
dimension of the expanded ROB exceeds a certain threshold, a method is proposed next to split the global ROB into two or
more local ROBs, and subsequently find an approximate solution at each queried parameter point using the most suitable
of precomputed and stored local ROBs. A similar approach was proposed in Reference 23 for constructing local ROBs,
where locality was defined however with respect to the solution manifold. This approach is not ideally suited for use with
in situ microscale training as it requires the clustering of solution snapshots, which can be computationally expensive in
this context. Thus, this article proposes an adaptive PMOR strategy with a method of databases containing local ROBs,
where locality is defined with respect to the parameter space. The details of this proposal are presented in Section 4.


4       ADAPTIVE IN SITU SA MPLING AND LOCAL REDUCED- ORDER BASES

Next, an in situ, adaptive sampling process based on the concept of a database k of local ROBs at each level k,
k = 1, … , ns , is presented. It leverages the accuracy and computational efficiency of the PMOR framework. The detec-
tion of extrapolation when solving a queried microscale BVP is performed using a residual-based error indicator. When
an update criterion is triggered by this indicator at level k, new information is sampled and used to enrich the content of
k . In order to preserve the computational efficiency of PMOR, a local ROB is split into two smaller ones if its current
size exceeds a certain limit.
    In principle, each time a local ROB is updated, the corresponding reduced mesh should also be updated—because the
training of ECSW depends on the state of the ROB. Therefore, the HPROM should be updated too accordingly. However,
efficiently performing such updates is outside the scope of this article: it is the subject of ongoing research. With multiple
local ROBs stored in a database k , the most appropriate local ROB and associated HPROM must be identified to solve
a microscale BVP queried at level k.
    In order to construct such an adaptive PMOR framework, both the microscale solution snapshots and the under-
lying deformation gradient parameter points are collected. In order to describe this adaptive framework, the following
additional nomenclature and notation are introduced:
                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                 4977


FIGURE 1          Extrapolation scenario for an in situ-trained
microscale HPROM: dark/light shaded area designates the region of the
parameter space explored/unexplored during training [Colour figure
can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]




      m                (m )
• z k = {z(1)
           k
               , … , zk k }, denotes a set of mk deformation gradient parameter points considered among those that have
  already been sampled at level k, and z(i) k
                                              ∈ k , i = 1, … , mk . It is collected in the matrix
                                                                        (m )
                                                    Nzk = [z(1)
                                                            k
                                                                … zk k ] ∈ Rnsd ×mk .

• Nuk denotes the corresponding snapshot matrix whose ith column stores the HDM-based solution of the microscale
  BVP characterized by z(i)
                         k
                            .


4.1         Detection of extrapolation and other large errors

When applied to the solution of a microscale BVP queried at an unsampled parameter point z⋆k ∈ k , a local, in
situ-trained, microscale HPROM will perform the equivalent of an extrapolated approximation if the sampling process
underlying the training of the corresponding local ROB did not explore a region of k containing z⋆k . This scenario is
illustrated in Figure 1, where k denotes the solution manifold at level k. Hence, if its pitfalls are to be avoided, the
potential for this scenario must be detected before the solution of the queried microscale BVP using a most appropriate
local HPROM is computed or accepted.
     There are two main approaches for detecting an extrapolation associated with the approximate solution of a queried
microscale BVP characterized by z⋆k : a geometric approach that determines the position of z⋆k in k , relative to the sampled
parameter points collected in Nzk and a residual-based approach that computes the residual obtained when approximating
the HDM-based solution of the queried microscale problem using a most appropriate local HPROM.
     The geometric approach is conceptually simple. However, its implementation is not trivial. It can be carried out by
computing the hypersphere of smallest radius containing all parameter points collected in Nzk , or the minimal hyperpoly-
gon connecting these parameter points, then checking whether z⋆k lies or not within the hypersphere or hyperpolygon.
Either implementation necessitates a fair amount of efficient computational geometry. In either case however, the main
drawback of this approach is that if z⋆k falls within either of the aforementioned target domains, this does not necessar-
ily imply that the approximate solution computed using the most-appropriate local HPROM has an acceptable accuracy.
Such information is provided however by the residual-based approach which, unlike the geometric approach, checks for
potential extrapolation after rather than before the solution of the queried microscale BVP is computed. Specifically, this
approach computes the following relative residual magnitude
                                                                               ◦
                                                               ||fk (Vk yk , uk )||
                                                        rk =              ◦
                                                                                                                           (8)
                                                                 ||fk (0, uk )||

and adopts it as an error indicator. When it exceeds a prescribed tolerance r tol , it suggests discarding the approximate
solution V k yk , enriching the most appropriate local ROB V k , and repeating this process at subsequent queried parameter
                                                                                                                                  10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4978                                                                                                                  HE et al.



points, until r k ≤ r tol . Hence, this alternative approach, which leads to the updating criterion outlined in Algorithm 1,
equally applies for assessing extrapolation and interpolation errors.

Algorithm 1. Updating criterion for a database of local HPROMs

    Data: Queried parameter point z⋆k ∈ k , and user-specifiedtolerance value rtol <0
    Result: Updating flag UF
                                                                                ⋆
  1 Compute the approximate solution of the microscale BVP characterized by z using the most-appropriate local
                                                                                k
     HPROM;
                                                                ⋆
  2 Compute the corresponding relative residual magnitude r (8);
                                                                k
        ⋆
  3 if r <rtol then
        k
  4     Solve the microscale BVP using the corresponding HDM;
  5     Collect the computed solution u⋆k in N uk ;
  6     Sample the parameter point z⋆k and collect it in N zk ;
  7     Set UF = true
  8 else
  9     Accept the HPROM solution u⋆k ;
 10     Set UF = false



4.2       Updating of a local reduced-order basis

Each update of a database k starts by solving a new microscale BVP using the corresponding HDM, appending the com-
puted solution u⋆k to the current content of the relevant snapshot matrix Nuk , performing the singular value decomposition
(SVD) of Nuk , and deducing a new ROB using the singular value energy truncation criterion. Because the computational
complexity of SVD applied to a rectangular matrix scales quadratically with the number of columns of the matrix, a
low-rank SVD update method such as that presented in Reference 26 is preferred here for compressing the collected
snapshots.
    For a highly nonlinear problem, the SVD and singular value energy truncation criterion configured for accuracy typ-
ically lead to a large ROB. Hence, if the size of such a ROB exceeds a specified capacity limit cmax , this ROB is split here
into two smaller ROBs, each of which capable of capturing only the local behavior of a nonlinear microstructure. This
splitting, which is bound in this context to occur recursively, leads to the concept of a local ROB. This concept is similar
to that of local ROBs pioneered in Reference 23 and equipped with the notion of clustering of solution snapshots. How-
ever, it differs from it in that locality refers here to the parameter space k , whereas locality in Reference 23 referred to
the solution manifold (denoted here by k ). Indeed, the data collected in a parameter matrix Nzk provide an alternative
approach for building local ROBs by a mechanism centered around updating and splitting. Again, the updating criterion,
which is proposed in this work for avoiding extrapolation, is described in Algorithm 1. Its basic principle is described in
Algorithm 2. The proposed splitting algorithm is described below.

Algorithm 2. Updating a ROB

    Data: Sampled parameter vector z⋆k (or point in k ), correspondingHDM-based solution snapshot u⋆k , ROB V k ,
          matrixof sampled deformation gradient parameter points N zk , and snapshot matrixN uk
    Result: Updated ROB V k , updated sampled parameter matrix N zk ,and updated snapshot matrix N uk
                  [ z      ]
  1 Update N ← N
              z
                       z⋆k
              k   [ uk      ]
  2 Update N ← N
              u
              k      k
                       u⋆k
                                      u
  3 Perform low-rank SVD update of N
                                      k
  4 Extract new (updated) ROB V k



    Specifically, Nzk provides a mean for splitting a region of the parameter space k rather than a region of the solution
space in two parts, using, for example, principle component analysis (PCA) or POD, both of which build on SVD. PCA
is most useful for exploratory data analysis. It is used here to compute the direction of maximum variance nk of a set of
                                                                                                                                  10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                  4979


FIGURE 2           Splitting a set of sampled parameter
points in two sets in order to partition a snapshot
matrix into two matrices and thereby split a ROB into
two local ROBs [Colour figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]




                                                              (A)                             (B)




                                  m
sampled parameter points z k as the first eigenvector of the covariance of the corresponding parameter matrix
                                                                             T      T
                                                          Cov(Nzk ) = Nzk Nzk − zk zk ,                                     (9)

where zk ∈ Rnsd is the columnwise mean of Nzk —that is,

                                                            1 ∑ z
                                                                    mk
                                                    zki =         N ,      i = 1, … , nsd                                  (10)
                                                            mk j=1 kij

and therefore zk represents the algebraic centroid of the sampled parameter points.
   Next, the hyperplane hk containing the centroid point zk and orthogonal to nk is constructed. This hyperplane can be
described as
                                                          hk = {x|(x − zk )T nk = 0}.                                      (11)

                            m
    It naturally splits z k into two smaller sets, where each partitioned set has a more compact spatial distribution in
k (see Figure 2B). In principle, any suitably efficient splitting algorithm—such as the closely related K-means cluster-
ing algorithm—can be substituted for PCA in the proposed methodology without any significant impact on its overall
performance.
                                                                                    m
    As illustrated in Figure 2, the splitting of a set of sampled parameter points z k into two smaller sets, which is equiv-
alent to the partitioning of a matrix Nzk into two smaller matrices, implies a splitting of a region of the parameter space
k . It also leads to the partitioning of the snapshot matrix Nuk in two snapshot matrices. Finally, the compression of these
two matrices leads in turn to the construction of two new local ROBs. The entire splitting process is summarized in
Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3. Splitting a ROB

    Data: Matrix of sampled deformation gradient parameter points N zk , snapshotmatrix N uk , and database of
          HPROM-related information k
                                                                           (1)      (2)                           (1)
    Result: Split local ROBs V (1)
                               k
                                   and V (2)
                                         k
                                             , split parametermatrices N zk and N zk , split snapshotmatrices N uk , and
                 (2)
           N uk , and updateddatabase k
                                                        z
  1 Compute the first eigenvector nk of the matrix Cov(N ) (9)
                                                        k
  2 Construct the hyperplane hk (11)
                                  z                           (1)         (2)
  3 Using hk , partition N
                                  k
                                    into two matrices N zk and N zk
                 u                                                u(1)        (2)
  4 Partition N accordingly, into two matrices N
                 k                                                k
                                                                       andN uk
                  (1)     (2)             (1)      (2)
  5 Compute V , V
                  k       k
                                from N uk ,N uk , respectively
           (1)    z(1)       (1)                  (2)    (2)
  6 Add V , N
           k      k
                       , N uk , andV (2)k
                                            , N zk , N uk to the contentof the database k
  7 Delete V k , N , N from the content ofthe database k
                    z     u
                    k     k
                                                                                                                                   10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4980                                                                                                                   HE et al.



4.3                 Approximation using a most appropriate local ROB

The adaptive, in situ sampling process described so far, which centers around updating and splitting ROBs, eventually
leads to the presence of multiple local ROBs in a database k . Hence, when a microscale BVP characterized by an
unsampled parameter point z⋆k is queried for fast solution by a local HPROM, the most appropriate local ROB available
in k must be identified online. This can be performed as proposed below.
          n               (n )
   Let Vk = {V(1)
                 k
                   , … , Vk k } denote the set of all nk local ROBs that are precomputed and stored at a given time in a
database k . Recall from Section 4 that each HDM-based solution u(i)k
                                                                        of a microscale BVP is associated with a parameter
                                                                                                      (l)
point z(i)
       k
           of the parameter space k that characterizes the BVP. Hence, a split snapshot matrix Nuk can be associated on
                                                    (l)
the same basis with a split parameter matrix Nzk . Similarly, a local ROB V(l)
                                                                           k
                                                                               can be associated with the snapshot matrix
      (l)                                                                                       (l)
Nuk that was compressed to obtain V(l)
                                   k
                                       , and by transitivity, with the split parameter matrix Nzk .
              (l)                                                                  (l)
        Let zk denote the algebraic centroid of the parameter matrix Nzk (defined as in (10)). Following the same reasoning
                              (l)
as above, it follows that zk can be associated with the local ROB V(l)
                                                                   k
                                                                       . More generally, a bijection can be defined between
the set of sampled parameter points z(l)
                                     k
                                         and the set local ROBs V(l)
                                                                 k
                                                                     precomputed at any given time.
    Now, given a queried BVP characterized by an unsampled deformation gradient parameter point z⋆k —or more simply,
                                                                                                                   n
given a queried but unsampled parameter point z⋆k —a most appropriate, precomputed, local ROB Vk k ∈ Vk —that is,
                                                                                                            (j )

jk ∈ {1, … , nk }, can be defined as the precomputed local ROB whose corresponding parameter point is the closest to the
queried but unsampled parameter point z⋆k —that is,

                                                                          ||zk − z⋆k ||,
                                                                             (i)
                                                   jk = argmin
                                                          i∈{1, … ,nk }


where |||| denotes any preferred norm, for example, ||||2 .


4.4                 Summary: In situ adaptive microscale PMOR framework

Algorithm 4 summarizes the in situ, adaptive, PMOR framework proposed for the acceleration of the solution of the
microscale BVPs at any level k, k = 1, … , ns .

Algorithm 4. In situ, adaptive, PMOR framework for the microscale BVPs at level k

    Data: User-specified residual tolerance rtol , and user-specified ROB capacity limit cmax
                                                    k−1 | |
    Result: HDM/HPROM-based solutions of Πj=0           |j | microscale BVPsat level k, and database of HPROM-related
             information k
  1 Initialize mk
               z       u
  2 Collect N and N and compute V k usingthe in situ training strategy described in Section∼3.2
               k       k
  3 Initialize the content of k with V k , N andN
                                              z         u
                                                        k
                                      ∏k−1 | k|
  4 for solving each of the remaining   j=0 |j | − mk microscaleBVPs do
  5    Compute the deformation gradient parameter point z⋆k
                                                                                         (j )
  6         Identify in k the corresponding most-appropriate local ROB V k k
  7         Apply Algorithm 1 to update or not k
  8         if UF = true (see Algorithm 1) then
  9            Update k using Algorithm 2
 10            if size of updated ROB <cmax then
 11                Split ROB using Algorithm 3
 12            else
 13                Continue (to the next microscale BVP)
 14         else
 15            Continue (to the next microscale BVP)
                                                                                                                                 10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                 4981



5           APPLICAT IONS

Here, the computational feasibility as well as the performance of the in situ, adaptive, PMOR framework for microscale
BVPs are demonstrated for two nonlinear, nonparametric, dynamic, two-scale simulations (ns = 1). Specifically, this
framework is applied to the solution of two academic but nevertheless computationally intensive, nonlinear, two-level,
dynamic response problems. For both applications, all ROBs are constructed using POD based on displacement solution
snapshots. Because adaptive hyperreduction is beyond the scope of this article, all HPROMs are constructed based on a
single reduced mesh that is trained and generated using ECSW during the initialization step of Algorithm 4. Given that
at the macroscale level neither considered problem is parametric, PMOR is applied in both cases only to the microscale
model. This setting has two benefits:

• It enables the exclusive focusing on the performance of the proposed in situ, adaptive approach for performing the
  PMOR of microscale problems.
• It corresponds to the worst-case scenario of PMOR performance, as any computational overhead incurred by the PMOR
  process may only be amortized in this case by the same simulation to which the PMOR process is applied. Hence, any
  reported speedup factor is a genuine speedup factor.

    Since both applications considered herein involve two-scale simulations (ns = 1), the model labels PROM and HPROM
refer throughout the remainder of this section to the microscale computational model. On the other hand, the label HDM
may refer to either the macroscale or the microscale computational model.
    In both applications, the tolerance for the residual-based error indicator is set to r tol = 0.001, and the capacity limit
for the dimension of a local ROB is set to cmax = 20. The accuracy of all PROM and HPROM approximations is evaluated
using the following definition of a relative global error

                                                | ∑ Δs(u⋄ (t) − ũ ⋄ (t))T 1 |
                                                | t∈P                        |
                                         erel = |     ∑                      | × 100%,
                                                |           ΔsuT
                                                                 (t)1        |
                                                |       t∈P    ⋄             |
                                                                                                          d
where the ⋄ subscript designates the x, y, or z direction of a global reference frame, u⋄ (t) ∈ Rn0 is the vector of
⋄-displacements at time t extracted from the macroscale solution based on HDMs at both the macroscale and microscale
levels, ũ ⋄ (t) ∈ Rn0 is the vector of ⋄-displacements at time t extracted from the macroscale solution but based on a PROM
                     d


or HPROM at the microscale level, Δs is the error sampling time-step size, 1 denotes the vector of 1 entries, and P is the
set of error sampling time-steps

                                             P = {t0 , t0 + Δs, t0 + 2Δs, … , tf },

where t0 is the initial simulated time and tf is the final simulated time.
    All computations reported herein are performed on a Linux cluster with 84 compute nodes, dual-socket Intel Xeon
E5-2650 v2 CPUs (eight cores/socket), 64 GB of DDR3 memory/node, a 1:1 subscribed FDR Infiniband network, and a
Lustre shared file system tuned for parallel I/O.
    For both applications, all reported PROM and HPROM wall-clock timings as well as speedup factors account for all
training costs.


5.1          Vibration of a nonlinear solid elastic bar with a microvoid structure

A computational model for a solid bar made of a heterogeneous structure is considered here. At the finest scale, this
structure is characterized by microscopic voids and a porosity ratio of 0.5 (here, the porosity ratio is defined as the
ratio of the total volume occupied by the voids, and the total volume occupied by the material and the voids). The
bar has a solid square cross section of height and width H = 1 cm, and a length L = 20 cm. It is fixed at both ends.
A distributed external force generated by a uniform pressure of magnitude p = 100 MPa is suddenly applied on its
upper face and oriented initially in the transverse direction. Due to symmetry, only half of the bar along its length
is modeled.
                                                                                                                                    10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4982                                                                                                                    HE et al.


                                                                                       FIGURE 3            Vibration of a
                                                                                       nonlinear solid elastic bar with a
                                                                                       microvoid structure: exterior geometry
                                                                                       and FE mesh of the microscale RVE
                                                                                       (left); interior geometry and FE mesh of
                                                                                       the rearward half of the microscale RVE
                                                                                       exposed by a clipping plane (right)
                                                                                       [Colour figure can be viewed at
                                                                                       wileyonlinelibrary.com]




                                                                                       FIGURE 4          Vibration of a
                                                                                       nonlinear solid elastic bar with a
                                                                                       microvoid structure: FE mesh
                                                                                       underlying the macroscale HDM




    At the microscale level, a FE model of the bar (see Figure 3) is constructed using 648 eight-noded hexahedral elements
with three displacement DOFs per node. The dimension of this HDM is nd1 = 1962 (1962 DOFs). At this level, the material
response is assumed to be well represented by a compressible neo-Hookean (finite strains) hyperelastic constitutive law
with Young’s modulus E = 207 GPa and Poisson’s ratio 𝜈 = 0.3. Uniform essential boundary conditions are adopted at this
level.
    At the macroscale level, a FE model of the bar (see Figure 4) is constructed using 640 eight-noded hexahedral elements
with three displacement DOFs/node, and a total number of 2975 DOFs (nd0 = 2975). At this level, the material density is
𝜌0 = 7830 kg/m3 , and temporal discretization is performed using the explicit central difference scheme and the constant
time-step Δt = 3.25 × 10−7 seconds. The response of the bar is computed from t0 = 0 seconds until tf = 1 × 10−2 seconds.
    First, an initial nonlinear PROM is constructed for the microscale computational model using the solution snapshots
collected at t0 = 0 second during the HDM-based solution of the first m1 = 500 microscale BVPs encountered at the Gauss
points of the macroscale computational model. Then, this PROM is hyperreduced using ECSW configured with the Law-
son and Hanson sparse NNLS algorithm and a relative accuracy threshold 𝜀 = 10−3 , which generates a reduced mesh with
115 elements (̃ = 115, see Figure 5).
    Several simulations are performed for this problem using: the macroscale and microscale HDMs described above; the
proposed in situ, adaptive, microscale PMOR framework, with and without hyperreduction (the reader is reminded that in
this work, any reduced mesh generated by ECSW-based hyperreduction is not updated); and the counterpart nonadaptive
microscale PMOR framework described in Reference 9, with and without hyperreduction.
    Table 1(a) reports the speedup factors and relative global errors computed using the error sampling time-step Δs = Δt
measured for the proposed in situ, adaptive, microscale PMOR with and without hyperreduction. Similarly, Tables 1(b)-(d)
report these performance results for the counterpart in situ, nonadaptive, microscale PMOR framework previously pro-
posed in Reference 9. Since the latter framework depends in this case on the ad hoc parameter n0 specifying the number
of microscale BVPs to solve in order to train a global microscale PROM and the corresponding HPROM, three different
values of this parameter are considered. The first one, n0 = 62, corresponds to 0.2% of the total number nms of microscale
                                                                                                                                10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                4983


FIGURE 5          Vibration of a nonlinear solid elastic
bar with a microvoid structure: FE mesh underlying the
microscale HDM (wireframes) and associated
ECSW-generated reduced mesh (shaded elements)
[Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]




problems solved during the multiscale simulation performed in the time-interval [0,1 × 10−2 ] seconds using the time-step
size Δt = 3.25 × 10−7 seconds. The second and third values, n0 = 154 and n0 = 308, correspond to 0.5% of nms and 1% of
nms , respectively. From the results reported in this table, the following observations are noteworthy:

• In all cases, the HPROM delivers a much better speedup factor than its underlying PROM. This is expected given that
  the problem considered here is geometrically nonlinear (finite strains).
• The speedup factors delivered by all HPROMs are impressive, considering that the macroscale model is not even
  reduced.
• The adaptively computed PROM delivers six to 50 times more accurate results than its nonadaptive counterparts trained
  with any considered value of n0 and performs about 1.25 times faster.
• The adaptively computed HPROM—except for the nonadapted but fixed reduced mesh—delivers two to three times
  more accurate results than its nonadaptive counterpart trained with n0 = 62, but is 1.35 times slower. It delivers roughly
  the same wall-clock time performance as its nonadaptive counterpart trained with n0 = 154, and about the same accu-
  racy. On the other hand, it is about 1.2 times faster than its nonadaptive counterpart trained with n0 = 308, while
  delivering essentially the same accuracy.

    It follows that in all considered cases, the adaptive PROM is faster than its nonadaptive counterpart and considerably
more accurate. On the other hand, because the reduced mesh resulting from the ECSW-based hyperreduction is fixed in
this work, the otherwise adaptive HPROM can be anywhere from slightly slower to slightly faster than its nonadaptive
counterpart, and roughly as accurate.
    Considering that all aforementioned performance results account for all computational overhead, including the adap-
tation overhead, and that the proposed in situ, adaptive, microscale PMOR framework is fully automated, these results
demonstrate not only the feasibility of this framework but also its superiority over its nonadaptive counterpart. In partic-
ular, Figure 6 shows that even when the reduced mesh underlying the microscale computational model is not adapted,
the proposed adaptive framework delivers a remarkable accuracy.


5.2         Impact of a nonlinear elastic cylinder with a composite microstructure on a rigid
wall

Next, a computational model is considered for a cylindrical projectile with a heterogeneous microscale structure
characterized by a stiff, unidirectional fiber embedded in a flexible matrix. The cylinder has a radius R = 0.476 cm and a
                                                                                                                                      10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4984                                                                                                                      HE et al.


              T A B L E 1 Vibration of a nonlinear solid elastic bar with a microvoid structure: performance assessment

               (a) Adaptive                                           (b) Nonadaptive (n0 = 62)
                                          Wall-clock        Speedup                        Wall-clock        Speedup
               Model                      time (s)          factor  Model                  time (s)          factor

               HDM                        1.35 × 105        NA        HDM                  1.35 × 105        NA
                                                   4                                                4
               PROM                       3.75 × 10         3.60      PROM                 4.64 × 10         3.03
                                                   3                                                3
               HPROM                      8.92 × 10         15.2      HPROM                6.58 × 10         20.5
               Error measure e            PROM              HPROM     Error measure e      PROM              HPROM
               y-displacement (%)         0.0227            0.440     y-displacement (%)   1.23              1.27
               z-displacement (%)         0.0435            0.747     z-displacement (%)   2.11              2.59
               y-velocity (%)             0.103             1.77      y-velocity (%)       3.05              3.23
               z-velocity (%)             0.986             6.68      z-velocity (%)       9.52              10.6

               (c) Nonadaptive (n0 = 154)                            (d) Nonadaptive (n0 = 308)
                                          Wall-clock        Speedup                        Wall-clock        Speedup
               Model                      time (s)          factor  Model                  time (s)          factor
               HDM                        1.35 × 105        NA        HDM                  1.35 × 105        N.A.
               PROM                       4.54 × 104        2.97      PROM                 4.68 × 104        2.88
               HPROM                      8.71 × 103        15.5      HPROM                1.06 × 104        12.7
               Error measure e            PROM              HPROM     Error measure e      PROM              HPROM
               y-displacement (%)         0.0530            0.134     y-displacement (%)   0.0271            0.108
               z-displacement (%)         0.106             0.219     z-displacement (%)   0.0762            0.155
               y-velocity (%)             1.11              1.21      y-velocity (%)       1.10              1.03
               z-velocity (%)             6.24              6.50      z-velocity (%)       6.07              5.79




length L = 1.27 cm. It has an initial velocity v = 15 000 cm/s in the negative z-direction, and a frictionless rigid wall bound-
ary condition at z = 0. Due to symmetry, only one quarter of the bar along its length is modeled. This problem is a variant
of the so-called Taylor impact problem.27
    For this problem, a FE microscale computational model (see Figure 7) is constructed using 729 eight-noded hexahe-
dral elements with three displacement DOFs per node, and a total number of 2988 DOFs. Uniform essential boundary
conditions are adopted at this level. The microscale material is modeled as follows:

• The fiber is represented as a compressible neo-Hookean (finite strains) material with Young’s modulus
  E = 212.52 × 1010 dyne/cm2 and Poisson’s ratio 𝜈 = 0.4. It runs parallel to the local x-axis along the center of the cube
  where the locally attached microstructure is defined. Its cross-section is approximated by a square of edge size equal
  to one-third of the unit cell width.
• The flexible matrix surrounding this fiber is also represented as a compressible neo-Hookean material (finite strains),
  but with Young’s modulus E = 72.52 × 1010 dyne/cm2 and Poisson’s ratio 𝜈 = 0.4.

    At the macroscale level, a FE model is constructed using 1008 eight-noded hexahedral elements with three displace-
ment DOFs/node, and a total number of 1342 DOFs (see Figure 8). At this level, the density is 𝜌0 = 2.7 g/cm3 . Temporal
discretization is performed using the explicit central difference scheme and the constant time-step Δt = 1.0 × 10−9
seconds. For this problem, the multiscale simulation is performed from t0 = 0 seconds until tf = 1 × 10−6 seconds.
    As in the previous application, the proposed in situ, adaptive, microscale framework for PMOR is initialized with the
construction of a nonlinear PROM based on the first m1 = 500 HDM-based solutions of the microscale BVPs encountered
at the Gauss points of the macroscale computational model. Then, this PROM is hyperreduced using ECSW configured
with the same sparse NNLS algorithm as in the previous application, and the same threshold for relative accuracy 𝜀 = 10−3 .
ECSW generates in this case a reduced mesh with 88 elements (̃ = 88). Three multiscale computations are performed
                                                                                                                                          10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                          4985




F I G U R E 6 Vibration of a nonlinear solid elastic bar with a microvoid structure—time-histories of a displacement DOF and a velocity
DOF at a node of the mesh underlying the macroscale HDM computed using the macroscale and microscale HDMs and the in situ, adaptive,
microscale framework for PMOR with and without hyperreduction [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]


FIGURE 7           Impact on a
rigid wall of a nonlinear elastic
cylinder with a composite
microstructure: exterior
geometry and FE mesh of the
microscale RVE (left) with fiber
shown in green and surrounding
matrix in red and interior
geometry and FE mesh of the
rearward half of the microscale
RVE exposed by a clipping plane
(right)




            T A B L E 2 Impact on a rigid wall of a nonlinear elastic cylinder with a composite microstructure: performance
            assessment of the in situ, adaptive, microscale framework for PMOR with and without hyperreduction

             Model          Wall-clock time (s)        Speedup factor         Error measure e          PROM           HPROM

             HDM            2.44 × 104                 NA                     x-displacement (%)       0.00185        0.000467
                                     4
             PROM           1.60 × 10                  1.52                   y-displacement (%)       0.000165       0.000350
                                     3
             HPROM          3.34 × 10                  7.3                    x-velocity (%)           0.000449       0.00851
                                                                              y-velocity (%)           0.000430       0.00991




using the aforementioned macroscale and microscale HDMs and the proposed in situ, adaptive, microscale PMOR frame-
work, with and without hyperreduction. The obtained performance results are reported in Table 2, where the relative
global errors are computed with Δs = Δt.
    Figure 9 displays two sample time-histories computed for a displacement DOF and a velocity DOF at a same node of
the macroscale FE model. It shows that both adaptive PROM and HPROM reproduce extremely accurately the predic-
tions obtained using the macroscale and microscale HDMs. This impressive accuracy of the proposed adaptive PMOR
framework is confirmed by the quantitative error results reported in Table 2. This table also shows that for the application
considered herein, the in situ, adaptive, microscale framework for PMOR with and without hyperreduction accelerates
                                                                                                                                            10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4986                                                                                                                            HE et al.


                                                                                                FIGURE 8           Impact on a rigid wall
                                                                                                of a nonlinear elastic cylinder with a
                                                                                                composite microstructure: FE mesh
                                                                                                underlying the macroscale HDM




F I G U R E 9 Impact on a rigid wall of a nonlinear elastic cylinder with a composite microstructure—time-histories of a displacement
DOF and a velocity DOF at a node of the mesh underlying the macroscale HDM computed using the macroscale and microscale HDMs and the
in situ, adaptive, microscale framework for PMOR with and without hyperreduction [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]



the time to solution of the simulation based on the macroscale and microscale HDMs by a factor greater than 7. Again,
this is an excellent performance result considering that it accounts for the computational time elapsed in the process-
ing of the macroscale model, which is neither reduced nor hyperreduced, and accounts for all computational overhead
associated with the PMOR process—including adaptation.


6       CO N C LUSION S

An in situ, adaptive, microscale projection-based model order reduction (PMOR) framework is proposed in this arti-
cle for accelerating the simulation of the nonlinear dynamics of multiscale structural and solid mechanics systems. It
is designed to avoid by construction the weakness of extrapolation typically found in nonadaptive training methods.
This framework is based on the parameterization of the deformation gradient for the purpose of PMOR at all but the
coarsest scale, and on the concept of a database of local reduced-order bases (ROBs) where locality is measured in the
                                                                                                                                              10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
HE et al.                                                                                                                              4987



deformation gradient parameter space. It achieves accuracy by sampling new high-dimensional information as needed,
updating on-the-fly a constructed ROB, and approximating the solution along its trajectory using a handbook of most
appropriate local ROBs. It achieves computational efficiency by splitting an updated ROB that becomes larger than desired
into two local ones, each capable of capturing only the local behavior of a nonlinear mesostructure or microstructure,
and incorporating hyperreduction (albeit without adaptivity). If the macroscale computational model is not a parametric
one, it is not reduced. Even in this case—that is, when the macroscale computational model is high-dimensional and its
computational cost is accounted for—and when all computational overhead associated with performing PMOR and its
adaptation are also accounted for, the proposed in situ, adaptive, PMOR framework accelerates three-dimensional, non-
linear, dynamic, multiscale simulations of the academic type by roughly an order of magnitude without compromising
accuracy. Larger speedup factors can be expected for more realistic, large-scale problems and when adaptivity is extended
to hyperreduction.
    Although described in the context of nonlinear, multiscale, dynamic problems in solid mechanics and structural
dynamics, the proposed in situ, adaptive, PMOR framework is sufficiently comprehensive to be tailorable to many other
applications. Indeed, conventional offline training of ROBs in a predetermined region of a parameter space typically leads
to parametric reduced-order models that are bound to perform some form of extrapolation, whenever they are exercised
in a region of the parameter space that was not explored during training. The proposed framework is designed specifically
to remedy this issue.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge partial support by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) under Early
Stage Innovations (ESI) Grant NASA-NNX17AD02G, partial support by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under
grant FA9550-17-1-0182, and partial support by a research grant from the King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology
(KACST). This document does not necessarily reflect the position of these institutions, and no official endorsement should
be inferred.

ORCID
Philip Avery https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1310-6790
Charbel Farhat https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2563-8820

REFERENCES
 1. Qiao P, Yang M, Bobaru F. Impact mechanics and high-energy absorbing materials. J Aerosp Eng. 2008;21(4):235-248.
 2. Ma E, Zhu T. Towards strength–ductility synergy through the design of heterogeneous nanostructures in metals. Mater Today.
    2017;20(6):323-331.
 3. Hoffler C, Moore K, Kozloff K, Zysset P, Brown M, Goldstein S. Heterogeneity of bone lamellar-level elastic moduli. Bone.
    2000;26(6):603-609.
 4. Mei CC, Vernescu B. Homogenization Methods for Multiscale Mechanics. Singapore: World scientific; 2010.
 5. Smit R, Brekelmans W, Meijer H. Prediction of the mechanical behavior of nonlinear heterogeneous systems by multi-level finite element
    modeling. Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng. 1998;155(1-2):181-192.
 6. Miehe C, Schröder J, Schotte J. Computational homogenization analysis in finite plasticity simulation of texture development in
    polycrystalline materials. Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng. 1999;171(3-4):387-418.
 7. Feyel F, Chaboche JL. FE2 multiscale approach for modelling the elastoviscoplastic behaviour of long fibre SiC/Ti composite materials.
    Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng. 2000;183(3-4):309-330.
 8. Kouznetsova V, Brekelmans W, Baaijens F. An approach to micro-macro modeling of heterogeneous materials. Comput Mech.
    2001;27(1):37-48.
 9. Zahr MJ, Avery P, Farhat C. A multilevel projection-based model order reduction framework for nonlinear dynamic multiscale problems
    in structural and solid mechanics. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2017;112(8):855-881.
10. Le B, Yvonnet J, He QC. Computational homogenization of nonlinear elastic materials using neural networks. Int J Numer Methods Eng.
    2015;104(12):1061-1084.
11. Nguyen-Thanh VM, Zhuang X, Rabczuk T. A deep energy method for finite deformation hyperelasticity. Europ J Mech-A/Solids.
    2020;80:103874.
12. Sirovich L. Turbulence and the dynamics of coherent structures. I. Coherent structures. Quart Appl Math. 1987;45(3):561-571.
13. LeGresley P, Alonso J. Airfoil design optimization using reduced order models based on proper orthogonal decomposition. Paper presented
    at: Proceedings of the Fluids 2000, Conference and Exhibit; Denver, Colorado: 2000:2545.
14. Manzoni A, Quarteroni A, Rozza G. Shape optimization for viscous flows by reduced basis methods and free-form deformation. Int J Numer
    Methods Fluids. 2012;70(5):646-670.
                                                                                                                                               10970207, 2020, 22, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nme.6505 by Spanish Cochrane National Provision (Ministerio de Sanidad), Wiley Online Library on [30/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4988                                                                                                                               HE et al.



15. Farhat C, Bos A, Tezaur R, Chapman T, Avery P, Soize C. A stochastic projection-based hyperreduced order model for model-form uncer-
    tainties in vibration analysis. Paper presented at: Proceedings of the 2018 AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference; Kissimmee,
    Florida: 2018:1410.
16. Farhat C, Bos A, Avery P, Soize C. Modeling and quantification of model-form uncertainties in eigenvalue computations using a stochastic
    reduced model. AIAA J. 2018;56(3):1198-1210.
17. Hetmaniuk U, Tezaur R, Farhat C. Review and assessment of interpolatory model order reduction methods for frequency response
    structural dynamics and acoustics problems. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2012;90(13):1636-1662.
18. Amsallem D, Cortial J, Farhat C. Towards real-time computational-fluid-dynamics-based aeroelastic computations using a database of
    reduced-order information. AIAA J. 2010;48(9):2029-2037.
19. Yvonnet J, He QC. The reduced model multiscale method (R3M) for the non-linear homogenization of hyperelastic media at finite strains.
    J Comput Phys. 2007;223(1):341-368.
20. Monteiro E, Yvonnet J, He QC. Computational homogenization for nonlinear conduction in heterogeneous materials using model
    reduction. Comput Mater Sci. 2008;42(4):704-712.
21. Farhat C, Avery P, Chapman T, Cortial J. Dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models with finite rotations and
    energy-based mesh sampling and weighting for computational efficiency. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2014;98(9):625-662.
22. Farhat C, Chapman T, Avery P. Structure-preserving, stability, and accuracy properties of the energy-conserving sampling and weighting
    method for the hyper reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2015;102(5):1077-1110.
23. Amsallem D, Zahr MJ, Farhat C. Nonlinear model order reduction based on local reduced-order bases. Int J Numer Methods Eng.
    2012;92(10):891-916.
24. Lawson CL, Hanson RJ. Solving Least Squares Problems. Vol 15. Philadelphia: Siam; 1995.
25. Chapman T, Avery P, Collins P, Farhat C. Accelerated mesh sampling for the hyper reduction of nonlinear computational models. Int
    J Numer Methods Eng. 2017;109(12):1623-1654.
26. Zahr MJ, Farhat C. Progressive construction of a parametric reduced-order model for PDE-constrained optimization. Int J Numer Methods
    Eng. 2015;102(5):1111-1135.
27. Taylor GI. The use of flat-ended projectiles for determining dynamic yield stress I. theoretical considerations. Proc Royal Soc Lond Ser
    A Math Phys Sci. 1948;194(1038):289-299.



SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.



   How to cite this article: He W, Avery P, Farhat C. In situ adaptive reduction of nonlinear multiscale structural
   dynamics models. Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2020;121:4971–4988. https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.6505
