                                        Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

                                                   ScienceDirect
                                   Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189
                                                                                                           www.elsevier.com/locate/cma




High-performance model reduction techniques in computational
                multiscale homogenization
     J.A. Hernández a,c,⇑, J. Oliver a,b, A.E. Huespe b,d, M.A. Caicedo a, J.C. Cante a,c
a
    Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics en Enginyeria (CIMNE), Technical University of Catalonia, Ediﬁcio C1, Campus Norte, Jordi
                                                       Girona 1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain
      b
        E.T.S. d’Enginyers de Camins, Canals i Ports, Technical University of Catalonia, Ediﬁcio C1, Campus Norte, Jordi Girona 1-3,
                                                            Barcelona 08034, Spain
     c
       E.T.S. d’Enginyeries Industrial i Aeronàutica de Terrassa, Technical University of Catalonia, C/Colom, 11, Terrassa 08222, Spain
                                        d
                                          CIMEC, CONICET, Güemes 3450, 3000 Santa Fe, Argentina

                         Received 29 July 2013; received in revised form 19 March 2014; accepted 24 March 2014
                                                      Available online 3 April 2014




Abstract

    A novel model-order reduction technique for the solution of the ﬁne-scale equilibrium problem appearing in computa-
tional homogenization is presented. The reduced set of empirical shape functions is obtained using a partitioned version —
that accounts for the elastic/inelastic character of the solution — of the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD). On the
other hand, it is shown that the standard approach of replacing the nonaﬃne term by an interpolant constructed using only
POD modes leads to ill-posed formulations. We demonstrate that this ill-posedness can be avoided by enriching the
approximation space with the span of the gradient of the empirical shape functions. Furthermore, interpolation points
are chosen guided, not only by accuracy requirements, but also by stability considerations. The approach is assessed in
the homogenization of a highly complex porous metal material. Computed results show that computational complexity
is independent of the size and geometrical complexity of the Representative Volume Element. The speedup factor is over
three orders of magnitude — as compared with ﬁnite element analysis — whereas the maximum error in stresses is less than
10%.
Ó 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Keywords: Multiscale; Homogenization; Model reduction; High-performance reduced-order model; Hyperreduction; POD




 ⇑ Corresponding author at: Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics en Enginyeria (CIMNE), Technical University of Catalonia,
Ediﬁcio C1, Campus Norte, Jordi Girona 1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain.
   E-mail address: jhortega@cimne.upc.edu (J.A. Hernández).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2014.03.011
0045-7825/Ó 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
150                   J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


1. Introduction

1.1. Motivation and goal

   The major challenge in the macro-scale continuum description of heterogeneous materials such as compos-
ites and polycrystalline metals (that exhibit a clear heterogeneous composition at the micro-, or meso-, scale,
but that can be regarded, for practical purposes, as homogeneous at the macro-scale) lies in the determination
of a constitutive connection, between macro-stresses and macro-strains, that accurately reﬂects the properties
and geometrical arrangement of the distinct phases at the ﬁner scale. It is well-known [34] that, under the
hypotheses of either periodicity or statistical homogeneity, on the one hand; and scale separation, on the
other hand, this constitutive link can be systematically established by solving, for each point at the coarse
scale, a boundary value problem (BVP) on a certain representative microscopic subdomain. In a strain-
driven formulation of this BVP, the macro-strain at a given point acts as “loading parameter”, in the form
of appropriate essential boundary conditions, whereas the associated macro-stress is obtained through
volume averaging — i.e., homogenization — of the corresponding micro-stress ﬁeld.
   Methods dealing with the solution of this BVP range from purely analytical approaches to direct computa-
tional methods, such as the two-level, Finite Element (FE2 ) method [29]. Analytical approaches are
computationally inexpensive, but only valid for certain types of geometrically and constitutively simple
micro-structures. By contrast, direct computational methods have no other limitation in scope than the
imposed by the aforementioned hypotheses of statistical homogeneity and scale separation — in these
methods, the microscopic BVP at each coarse-scale point is attacked using no other approximation than
the spatial discretization of the pertinent solution strategy, thus, circumventing the need for introducing ad-
hoc, simplifying assumptions regarding the topological arrangement of the micro-phases and/or their
collective constitutive behavior. Needless to say, the versatility of direct computational homogenization
comes at a signiﬁcant price: its enormous computational cost.
   Between these two extremes (purely analytical and direct computational methods), there are homogeniza-
tion strategies that can be termed semi-analytical, since they combine analytical results with numerical com-
putations. Such is the case of the Transformation Field Analysis (TFA) [25] and variants thereof [48,49,55,30],
which are based on the pre-computation of certain characteristic operators (strain localization and inﬂuence
tensors) using the information obtained from solving a carefully chosen battery of ﬁne-scale BPVs. Although
these methods have notably widen the scope of classical analytical approaches — while maintaining their low
computational cost — they are still predicated, to a lesser or greater extent, on ad-hoc assumptions connected
with the constitutive description of the involved phases. Consideration of new materials with unstudied com-
positions using semi-analytical approaches, thus, requires additional research eﬀorts by specialists in the ﬁeld
and eventual modiﬁcations of the corresponding mathematical and numerical formulations — in contrast to
direct computational homogenization approaches, such as the FE2 method, in which the formulation is “mate-
rial-independent”, and hence more versatile.
   The current state of aﬀairs in the ﬁeld of two-scale homogenization seems to call, thus, for a uniﬁed homog-
enization approach that combines somewhat the advantages of direct computational homogenization and
analytical and semi-analytical techniques. It would be desirable to have a homogenization method with a com-
putational cost virtually independent of the geometric complexity of the considered representative volume, as in
analytical and semi-analytical techniques. At the same time, it would be also interesting to arrive at a method
whose mathematical formulation dispenses with ad-hoc, simplifying assumptions related with the composition
of the heterogeneous material; i.e., one enjoying the versatility, unrestricted applicability and “user-friendli-
ness” — insofar as it would totally relieve the modeler from the often exceedingly diﬃcult task of visualizing
such assumptions — of direct computational homogenization methods. The goal of the present paper is to
show that these desirable attributes can be achieved, for arbitrarily complex heterogeneous materials well into
the inelastic range, by using the so-called [46] reduced-basis (RB) approximation in the solution of the ﬁne-scale
BVPs.
                           J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                             151


1.2. The reduced-basis method

   Generally speaking, the reduced-basis approximation is a class of Galerkin approximation procedure that
employs, as opposed to the FE method, but similarly to classical Rayleigh–Ritz solution techniques [19],
globally supported basis functions. The main diﬀerence with respect to classical Rayleigh–Ritz schemes is
that these basis functions or modes are not constructed from either polynomials or transcendental functions
(sines, cosines . . .), but rather are determined from a larger set of previously computed — using the ﬁnite
element (FE) method or other classical solution techniques — solutions of the BVP at appropriately
selected values of the input of interest. These functions are commonly termed empirical basis functions [41],
the qualiﬁer empirical meaning “derived from computational experiments”.

1.2.1. Dimensionality reduction
    As noted earlier, the input of interest or “loading” parameter in the ﬁne-scale problem is the macro-scale
strain tensor. Accordingly, the starting point for constructing the basis functions consists in solving, using the
FE method, a battery of BVPs for various, representative macro-strain histories. The outcome of these FE cal-
culations is a data set comprising an ensemble of hundred or even thousand (depending on the number of time
steps into which the strain histories are discretized) displacement ﬁeld solutions (also called snapshots). Were
all these snapshots barely correlated with each other, the dimension of the manifold spanned by them would
prove overly high, rendering the entire approach impractical — it would no longer qualify as a truly reduced
basis method. Fortunately, as we show in the present paper, in general, most of these snapshots do display
strong linear correlations between each other — i.e., they have redundant information — and, in addition,
contain deformation modes that are irrelevant to the quality of coarse-scale predictions. All that is required
to obtain a much lower dimensional representation of the solution data set, and therewith the desired reduced
basis, is an automatic means to identify and remove this redundant and irrelevant information, while preserv-
ing, as much as possible, its essential features. The problem of removing unnecessary complexity from huge
data sets so as to uncover dominant patterns is the central concern of disciplines such as digital image compres-
sion [59] and pattern recognition [8], to name but a few, and thereby many eﬃcient dimensionality reduction (or
data compression, in more common parlance) algorithms already exist to deal with it. In the present work, we
employ one of the simplest and most popular of these dimensionality reduction algorithms: the Proper
Orthogonal Decomposition1 (POD).
    It may be inferred from the above that the proposed homogenization method, like analytical and semi-ana-
lytical strategies, does introduce simpliﬁcations in solving the ﬁne-scale BVP. However, as opposed to analyt-
ical, and to a lesser extent, semi-analytical procedures, these simpliﬁcations are not introduced by the modeler,
but rather are automatically carried out by the abovementioned dimensionality reduction methods (in an oﬀ-
line stage, prior to the overall multiscale analysis). In other words, in the proposed method, the task of dis-
cerning what is essential and what is not2 is entirely delegated to the computer itself, and hence, its success
does not depend upon the depth of insight, experience, and knowledge base of the modeler — only some dis-
cretion is to be exercised in choosing appropriate strain paths for the oﬄine FE analyses. This feature natu-
rally confers the advantages of versatility and “user-friendliness” enjoyed by direct computational methods.

1.2.2. Numerical integration
   Once the global shape functions have been determined, the next step is to introduce an eﬃcient method for
numerically evaluating the integrals appearing in the weak form of the cell BVP. Of course one can simply use
the same Gauss quadrature formulae and the same sampling points (a total number of ng ¼ OðnÞ; n being the
number of mesh nodes) as the underlying ﬁnite element model. But this would be akin to integrating, say, a
third-order polynomial function using thousand of sampling points — a proﬂigate waste of computational
resources. Since displacement solutions for the cell BVP are constrained to lie in a reduced-order space of

  1
    By constraining the cell to deform only into the deformation modes determined by the POD, one automatically obtains a genuine
reduced-order model (ROM) of the cell.
  2
    Discerning what is essential and what is not is, according to Ashby [4], the key to any successful computational model (i.e., one that
strikes the right balance between accuracy and simplicity).
152                    J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


dimension nu  n, it is reasonable to expect that the corresponding stresses, internal forces and Jacobians will
also reside in reduced-order spaces of dimensions of order Oðnu Þ, and consequently, only p ¼ Oðnu Þ  ng
sampling points would suﬃce in principle to accurately evaluate the corresponding integrals. The challenging
questions that have to be confronted are where to locate these p sampling points and, loosely speaking, how to
determine their associated weighting functions so that maximum accuracy in the integration is attained.
   Approaches found in the model reduction literature that, directly or indirectly, deal with these fundamental
questions can be broadly classiﬁed either as interpolatory methods [7,33,53,18,5] or Gauss-type quadrature
strategies [3,39]. In both types of approaches, the integrand or part of the integrand is approximated by a lin-
ear combination of a reduced set of empirical modes. In interpolatory approaches, the coeﬃcients in this
approximation are obtained by interpolation at a set of pre-selected sampling points; the criterion for choosing
the location of such points is the minimization of the interpolation error over the ﬁnite element snapshots. In
Gauss-type quadrature procedures, on the other hand, the selection of sampling points and the calculation of
the accompanying weighting factors are simultaneously carried out, guided by a criterion of minimum integra-
tion error over the snapshots.
   In the BVP under consideration, the output of interest is the volume average of the stresses over the cell
domain and, therefore, accuracy is required not only in the integration of the equilibrium equation, but also
on the approximation of the stresses themselves. This is the reason why attention is focused here on interpo-
latory integration strategies, the variable subject to spatial interpolation being precisely the stresses.

1.3. Originality of this work

   The idea of exploiting the synergistic combination of multiscale modeling and reduced basis approximation
is admittedly not new. In the speciﬁc context of two-scale homogenization, it has been recently explored by
Boyaval [10], Yvonnet and He [61] and Monteiro et al. [50]. Traces of this idea can also be found in
articles dealing with more general hierarchical multiscale techniques — that do not presuppose either scale
separation or periodicity/statistical homogeneity, or both — namely, in the multiscale ﬁnite element method
[52,26,27], in the heterogeneous multiscale method [2,1], and in multiscale approaches based on the Proper Gen-
eralized Decomposition (PGD) [21]. However, it should be noted that none of the above cited papers
confronts the previously described, crucial question of how to eﬃciently integrate the resulting reduced-
order equations, simply because, in most of them [10,52,26,27,2,1], integration is not an issue — the ﬁne-scale
BVPs addressed in these works bear an aﬃne relation with the corresponding coarse-scale, input parameter, as
in linear elasticity, and, consequently, all integrals can be pre-computed, i.e., evaluated oﬄine, with no impact
in the online computational cost. Thus, the development of reduced-order models endowed with eﬃcient,
mesh-size independent integration schemes — able to handle any material composition — is a research area
that, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, still remains uncharted.

1.3.1. Main original contributions
   The theory underlying reduced-order models (ROMs) that incorporate eﬃcient interpolatory integration
schemes is still at its embryonic stage of development — the ﬁrst general proposal for parametrized BVPs
dates back to 2004 [7] — and many fundamental issues remain to be addressed. Foremost among these is
the crucial question of well-posedness of the resulting system of algebraic equations: does the replacement
of the integrand, or nonaﬃne term in the integrand, by a reduced-order interpolant always lead to a well-
posed, discrete problem? Examination of the reduced basis literature indicates that apparently no
researcher has so far been confronted with ill-posed reduced-order equations, a fact that might certainly
promote the view that uniqueness of solution can be taken for granted whenever the full-order model is
well-posed. Unfortunately, this is not always so: we demonstrate in this paper that the choice of the
reduced-order space in which the interpolant of the integrand resides has a profound impact on the well-
posedness of the discrete problem. In particular, we show that, in the case of the ﬁne-scale boundary-value
problem, the widely adopted [33] approach of determining the basis functions for this space from
(converged) FE snapshots leads invariably to ill-posed, discrete formulations. The main original contribution
of the present work to the ﬁeld of reduced-order modeling is the development of an interpolatory integration
method that safely overcomes this type of ill-posedness. The gist of the method is to expand the interpolation
                            J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                             153




                                                   Fig. 1. First-order homogenization.


space so that it embraces, aside from the span of the POD stress basis functions, the space generated — and
herein lies the novelty — by the gradient of the (reduced-order) shape functions. Furthermore, it is shown that,
in contrast to the situation encountered when using standard interpolatory schemes in other parametrized
BVPs [33], in the BVP under consideration, the number and particular placement of sampling points within
the integration domain inﬂuence notably the spectral properties (positive deﬁniteness) of the Jacobian matrix
of the governing equation, and therefore, the convergence characteristics of the accompanying Newton–
Raphson solution algorithm. Another innovative ingredient of the present paper is a points selection
algorithm that does acknowledge this peculiarity and chooses the desired sampling points guided, not only
by accuracy requirements (minimization of the interpolation error over the FE stress snapshot), but also by
stability considerations.

2. RVE equilibrium problem

   In this section, we present the variational statement and ﬁnite element discretization of the ﬁne-scale equi-
librium problem, which, recall, is the parameterized BVP we wish to eﬃciently solve using the reduced-basis
approximation.

2.1. Preliminaries

   Let X  Rd ðd ¼ 2; 3Þ be a subvolume of characteristic length l  lM (lM is the characteristic length of the
macro-continuum XM , see Fig. 1) that is representative of the heterogeneous material as a whole. In micro-
structures that exhibit statistical homogeneity, this domain receives the name of Representative Volume Ele-
ment (RVE), whereas in micro-structures that display periodicity, it is commonly known as repeating unit cell
(RUC), or simply unit cell [24]. In the sequel, the acronym RVE will be used to refer to X.
   In the homogenization approach adopted in this work — commonly known as ﬁrst-order homogenization
[32,40] — the strain ﬁeld ðxÞ at any point x 2 X is assumed to be decomposed into macroscopic and ﬂuctu-
ating contributions; under the hypothesis of inﬁnitesimal deformations, this decomposition can be written as:
       ðxÞ ¼ M þ rs uðxÞ:                                                                                                            ð1Þ
Here, M stands3 for the macroscopic strain tensor (the input parameter in the problem) and rs u denotes the
symmetric gradient of the displacement ﬂuctuation ﬁeld (this ﬁeld is, in turn, the basic unknown of the problem).
   Implicit in the scale separation assumption is the fact that ﬁne-scale deformations only inﬂuence coarse-
scale behavior through its volume average over the RVE. It can be shown (see, for instance, Ref. [22]) that
this implies that the boundary conditions (BCs) prescribed on the RVE must be homogeneous (i.e.,

 3
   Macroscopic variables will be identiﬁed by appending a subscript “M”, while variables associated to the ﬁne scale will be designated by
bare symbols. For instance, we shall write M and ðxÞ to denote the macroscopic strain tensor and the ﬁne-scale strain ﬁeld, respectively.
154                       J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


A0 u ¼ 0 on @X; A0 being a certain linear operator). The natural choice for a repeating unit cell is to employ
periodic boundary conditions (See Refs. [9,47] for more details on how to prescribe this type of BCs). In sta-
tistically homogeneous micro-structures, by contrast, there is a certain latitude in the choice of boundary con-
ditions (vanishing ﬂuctuations, uniform tractions, quasi-periodic conditions . . .). In the examples shown later,
vanishing boundary conditions are used (u ¼ 0 on @X).

2.2. Variational formulation

2.2.1. Trial and test spaces
   The trial space, i.e., the set of kinematically admissible displacement ﬂuctuation ﬁelds, is deﬁned formally as
                          d
      V u ¼ fu 2 H 1 ðXÞ jA0 u ¼ 0; on @Xg;                                                                       ð2Þ
           1   d
where H ðXÞ stands for the Sobolev space of functions possessing square integrable derivatives over X. Note
that this set forms a vector space. Since the test functions g appearing in the variational statement shown in the
following are kinematically admissible variations ðg :¼ u  v; u; v 2 V u Þ; V u having structure of vector space
implies that, in the RVE equilibrium problem, the spaces of trial and test functions coincide.

2.2.2. Formal statement                                                   Snstp
   Consider a time discretization of the interval of interest ½t0 ; tf  ¼ n¼1  ½tn ; tnþ1 . The current value of the
microscopic stress tensor rnþ1 at each x 2 X is presumed to be entirely determined by, on the one hand,
the current value of the microscopic strain tensor nþ1 ðxÞ ¼ Mnþ1 þ rs unþ1 ðxÞ, and, on the other hand, a
set of microscopic internal variables nnþ1 — that encapsulate the history of microscopic deformations. The
relationship between these variables is established by (phenomenological) rate constitutive equations; these
equations may vary from point to point within the RVE (multiphase materials). Likewise, the considered
RVE may contain also voids distributed all over the domain. The (incremental) RVE equilibrium problem
at time tnþ1 can be stated as follows (see Ref. [22]): given the initial data fun ðxÞ; Mn ; nn ðxÞg and the
prescribed macroscopic strain tensor Mnþ1 , ﬁnd unþ1 2 V u such that
      Z
         rs g : rnþ1 ðMnþ1 þ rs unþ1 ; nnþ1 Þ dX ¼ 0                                                              ð3Þ
       X

for all g 2 V u . The actual output of interest in this ﬁne-scale BVP is not the displacement ﬂuctuation ﬁeld per se,
but rather the macroscopic stress tensor rM jnþ1 , which is deﬁned as the volume average over the RVE of the
microscopic stresses:
                      Z
                   1
      rM jnþ1 :¼         rnþ1 dX;                                                                                ð4Þ
                   V X
where V stands for the volume of the RVE. In order to keep the notation uncluttered, the superindex “n + 1”
will be hereafter dropped out and all quantities will be assumed to be evaluated at time tnþ1 ; only when con-
fusion is apt to show up, the pertinent distinction will be introduced.

2.3. Finite element formulation
            Sn e e
   Let X ¼ n¼1    X be a ﬁnite element discretization of the RVE. It will be assumed that this discretization is
ﬁne enough to consider the exact and FE approximated solutions indistinguishable at the accuracy level of
interest. Let fN 1 ðxÞ; N 2 ðxÞ . . . N n ðxÞg (n denotes the number of nodes of the discretization) be a set of shape
functions associated to this discretization. Now we approximate u 2 V u and g 2 V u as
                                     X
                                     n
      uðx; M Þ  uðhÞ ðx; M Þ ¼           N I ðxÞU I ðM Þ;                                                     ð5Þ
                                      I¼1
                          X
                          n
      gðxÞ  gðhÞ ðxÞ ¼         N I ðxÞgI ;                                                                       ð6Þ
                          I¼1
                            J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                               155


where U I 2 Rd and gI 2 Rd ðI ¼ 1; 2 . . . nÞ denote the nodal values of the displacement ﬂuctuations and test
functions, respectively. Inserting these approximations in Eq. (3), and exploiting the arbitrariness of coeﬃ-
cients gI ðI ¼ 1; 2 . . . nÞ, one arrives at the following set of discrete equilibrium equations (repeated indices im-
plies summation):
      Z
          @N I
               rij ðM þ rs uðhÞ ; nÞ dX ¼ 0 ði ¼ 1 . . . d; I ¼ 1 . . . nÞ:                                        ð7Þ
        X @x j

Introducing Voigt’s notation,4 the above equation can be expressed in matrix format as:
     Z
        B T rðM þ BU; nÞ dX ¼ 0;                                                                                                        ð8Þ
          X

As usual, numerical evaluation of the integral in Eq. (8) is carried out by Gaussian quadrature:
     Z             X
                   ng
        B T r dX     wg B T ðxg Þrðxg ; ;Þ ¼ 0:                                                                                         ð9Þ
          X               g¼1

Here, ng ¼ OðnÞ stands for the total number of Gauss points of the mesh; wg denotes the weight associated to
the g-th Gauss point xg (this weight includes both the quadrature weight itself and the corresponding Jacobian
determinant.); and Bðxg Þ and rðxg ; ;Þ stand for the B-matrix and the stress vector at Gauss point xg ,
respectively.

3. Computation of reduced basis

   A basic, intuitive picture of the strategy for computing the reduced basis onto which to project the RVE
equilibrium equation (3) was already given in the introductory section. In the following, we put the idea
behind this strategy on a more rigorous footing. We begin by noting that, from a functional analysis stand-
point, the term model reduction is conceptually akin to the more common term model discretization, since both
connote transitions from higher-dimensional to lower-dimensional solution spaces. Whereas model discretiza-
tion is used to refer to the (classical) passage from the inﬁnite dimensional space V u to the ﬁnite element sub-
space V hu  V u , model reduction denotes a transition from this ﬁnite dimensional space V hu to a signiﬁcantly
smaller manifold V u  V hu — the reduced-order space. This latter transition is not carried out directly, but
in two sequential steps, namely, sampling of the input parameter space and dimensionality reduction.

3.1. Sampling of the input parameter space

   In constructing the ﬁnite element space of kinematically admissible functions V hu , the only restrictions placed
on the motion of the mesh nodes are those imposed at the boundaries. The ﬁnite element solution space, thus,
does not presuppose any constraint on the motion of the interior nodes of the mesh.
   However, in actuality, interior nodes cannot ﬂuctuate freely, independently from each other, but they rather
move according to deformational patterns dictated by the constitutive laws that govern the mechanical behavior
of the distinct phases in the RVE.5 This means that the solution of the ﬁnite element equilibrium equation (3)
for given values of the macro-strain tensor M actually lives in a smaller subspace V u  V hu (in the parlance of
model reduction [46,56], V u is the manifold induced by the parametric dependence of the BVP on the input
variables).
   Yet, in general, this subspace cannot be precisely determined; one has to be content to construct an approx-
imation of it as the span of the displacement ﬂuctuation solutions obtained for a judiciously chosen set of nhst

  4
     Here, it is convenient to use the so-called modiﬁed Voigt’s notation rather than the standard one. In the modiﬁed Voigt’s notation, both
stress r and strain  tensors are represented as column vectors (frg and fg, respectively) in which the shear components are multiplied by
pﬃﬃﬃ
  2. The advantage of this notation over the conventional, engineering Voigt’s notation is the equivalence between norms; viz.,
                            qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
        pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
krk ¼ r : r ¼ kfrgk ¼ frgT frg. The reader is urged to consult [20] for further details on this notation.
 5
     As noted by Lubliner [45], constitutive laws can be regarded as internal restrictions on the kinds of deformation a body can suﬀer.
156                          J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


input strain histories ft 1M ; t 2M ; . . . ; t nMhst g. Suppose, for simplicity, that each of these strain histories is discret-
ized into equal number of steps nstp , and let
                         
      uk ðxÞ ¼ u x; t iMj ; k ¼ ði  1Þnhst þ j                                                                               ð10Þ

denote the displacement ﬂuctuation solution at the jth time step of the ith strain history
(i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nhst ; j ¼ 1; 2 . . . nstp ). The approximating space for V u , henceforth called the snapshots space, is then
deﬁned as:
        V snp       1      2
          u ¼ spanfu ðxÞ; u ðxÞ; . . . ; u
                                           nsnp
                                                ðxÞg # V u ;                                                                         ð11Þ
nsnp ¼ nstp nhst being the total number of snapshots. The matrix containing, in columns, the nodal values of
these displacement ﬂuctuations solutions:
                                   
      X u ¼ U 1 U 2    U nsnp 2 Rn:d nsnp                                                            ð12Þ
will correspondingly be termed the (displacement ﬂuctuations) snapshot matrix.

3.2. Dimensionality reduction

   The next and deﬁnitive step in the transition from the high-dimensional ﬁnite element space V hu to the
desired reduced-order space V u — in which the ﬁne-scale BVP is to be ﬁnally posed — is the dimensionality
reduction process, in which, as pointed out in the introductory section, the dominant deformational patterns
of the RVE response are identiﬁed and unveiled by washing out the “inessentials”. To accomplish this central
task, we employ here a partitioned version of the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition.6

3.2.1. Elastic-inelastic reduced basis functions
    The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition is nothing but a multidimensional data ﬁtting procedure intended
to obtain a sequence of orthogonal basis functions whose span best approximate the space of snapshots. As
such, the POD is a purely data-driven process — it is “agnostic” to the physical origin of the data. For instance,
for POD basis construction purposes, it is completely immaterial whether a given snapshot corresponds to a
purely linear elastic solution or to a solution well into the inelastic regime. The task of discriminating which
features of the RVE response are essential and which are not is exclusively guided by statistical considerations:
if the elastic response happens to be poorly represented within the snapshot ensemble, the POD may regard as
unimportant the contribution of these snapshots, and, as a consequence, the basis functions with largest asso-
ciated singular values — i.e., the essential modes — would hardly contain any information of this range. To
accurately replicate the apparently trivial linear elastic behavior, thus, one may be forced to take a relatively
large number of basis functions, and this may translate into a signiﬁcant increase in the overall online compu-
tational cost. This fact certainly places the POD-based reduced basis approach at a competitive disadvantage
compared with semi-analytical homogenization approaches such as the Nonlinear Transformation Field Anal-
ysis [49], which do capture exactly (and eﬀortlessly) the linear elastic response of the RVE.
    To eliminate this shortcoming, we propose here a slightly diﬀerent strategy for constructing
                                                                                                   the reduced
                                                                                             snp
basis. The essence of the proposal is to partition the space of snapshots V snp
                                                                            u into elastic V u;el and inelastic
         
 V snp
   u;inel   subspaces:
                snp
        V snp
          u ¼ V u;el     V snp
                           u;inel ;                                                                                                   ð13Þ
( symbolizes direct sum of subspaces [54]) and then obtain the reduced basis as the union of the bases for
both subspaces. Below, we describe this strategy more in detail.
   The ﬁrst step is to determine an orthogonal basis for V snpu;el . One can do this by simply performing me
independent, linear elastic ﬁnite element analysis of the RVE (me ¼ 6 for 3D problems,7 and me ¼ 3 for plane

 6
     See Appendix A for a brief description of the POD.
 7
     Strictly speaking, the proposed decomposition is only valid for materials governed by rate-independent constitutive equations.
                             J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                      157


strain), and then orthonormalizing the resulting displacement ﬂuctuation ﬁelds. These me elastic modes will be
considered as the ﬁrst me basis functions of the reduced basis:
      spanfU1 ; U2 ; . . . ; Ume g ¼ V snp
                                       u;el :                                                                                  ð14Þ
Once we have at our disposal this set of elastic basis functions, we compute the (orthogonal) projection of each
snapshot uk onto the orthogonal complement of V snp    u;el (which is precisely the aforementioned inelastic space
V snp
  u;inel ):
                       X
                       me
      ukinel :¼ uk       hUi ; uk iL2 ðXÞ Ui ;    k ¼ 1; 2 . . . nsnp :                                                       ð15Þ
                       i¼1
                                                                           nsnp
It is now on this ensemble of inelastic snapshots ukinel k¼1                          that the previously described POD is applied to
obtain the remaining nu  me basis functions. Thus, we ﬁnally have:
                                     8 Elastic modes                            Inelastic modes
                                                                                                9
                                     <zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ \Essential"
                                                                      zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ }|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ {    =
       V u ¼ V snp
                u;el V snp
                       u;inel ¼ span   U 1 ; U   2 ; . . . ; U 6 ;    U  7 ; .  . . ; U  n        :                              ð16Þ
                                     :                                                     u
                                                                                                ;

for 3D problems, and
                8 Elastic modes \Essential" inelastic modes9
                <zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{  zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ =
     V u ¼ span U1 ; U2 ; U3 ;      U4 ; . . . ; Unu                                                                          ð17Þ
                :                                          ;

for plane strain. In placing the me elastic modes within the ﬁrst me positions, the reduced-order model is guar-
anteed to deliver linear elastic solutions with the same accuracy as the underlying (full-order) ﬁnite element
model (obviously, provided that nu P me ).
   Further details concerning the numerical implementation of this apparently novel — to the best of the
authors’ knowledge — basis construction strategy can be found in Appendix B.

4. Galerkin projection onto the reduced subspace

     We now seek to pose the boundary-value problem represented by Eq. (3) in the reduced-order space
V u # V hu spanned by the basis functions fU1 ; U2 ; . . . ; Unu g. To this end, we approximate both test g 2 V u
and trial u 2 V u functions by the following linear expansions:
                                        X
                                        nu
      uðx; M Þ  u ðx; M Þ ¼            Ui ðxÞU i ðM Þ;                                                                   ð18Þ
                                         i¼1
                             X
                             nu
      gðxÞ  g ðxÞ ¼              Ui ðxÞgi ;                                                                                 ð19Þ
                             i¼1

u ðxÞ and g ðxÞ being the low-dimensional approximations of trial and test functions, respectively (hereafter,
asterisked symbols will be used to denote low-dimensional approximations of the associated variables). Insert-
ing Eqs. (18) and (19) into Eq. (3), and exploiting the arbitrariness of coeﬃcients gi (i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ), we arrive at
the following set of nu equilibrium equations:
       Z
         rs Ui ðxÞ : rðx; M þ rs u ; nÞ dX ¼ 0; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu :                                                ð20Þ
        X

Expressing now the reduced basis Pn functions in the above equation in terms of ﬁnite element shape functions
(through expression Ui ðxÞ ¼ I¼1 N I ðxÞUIi ), we get (in Voigt’s notation):
     Z
        B i T ðxÞ rðx; M þ B  U  ; nÞ dX ¼ 0; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ;                                    ð21Þ
        X

or more compactly:
158                        J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189

       Z
            B  T ðxÞ rðx; M þ B  U  ; nÞ dX ¼ 0:                                                                               ð22Þ
        X
                                T
Here, U  ¼ U 1 U 2    U nu 2 Rnu denotes the vector containing the reduced displacement ﬂuctuations —
the basic unknowns of the reduced-order problem — and B : X ! Rs nu stands for the reduced “B-matrix”,
deﬁned as:
       B  ðxÞ :¼ BðxÞU:                                                                                                           ð23Þ
This matrix connects the gradient of the displacement ﬂuctuation ﬁeld with the vector of reduced displacement
ﬂuctuations:
                                                                       U
                                                                  zﬄﬄﬄ
                                                                  2 ﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄ ﬄ{
                                                                           3
                                                                      U 1
                                             B                   6 7
             X nu          zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
                                                                 6 U2 7
                                                           6           7                             ð24Þ
       s 
      ru ¼        B i U i ¼ B1 B 2 . . . Bnu 6 . 7 ¼ B  U  ¼ BUU  :
                     
                                                                  6     .  7
              i¼1                                                 4 . 5
                                                                     U nu

For implementational purposes, it is more expedient to express Eq. (23) in terms of elemental B-matrices. To
this end, we write:
                    Be ðxÞ;   if x 2 Xe
       BðxÞ ¼                                                                                                                      ð25Þ
                    0;        otherwise
where Be 2 Rs dne denotes the local B-matrix of element Xe (ne , in turn, is the number of nodes in Xe ). Thus,
       B  ðxÞ ¼ BðxÞU ¼ B e ðxÞUe :                                                                                               ð26Þ
In the above equation, Ue 2 Rdne nu represents the block matrix of U corresponding to the ne nodes of ﬁnite
element Xe ðe ¼ 1; 2 . . . ne Þ.

5. Stress approximation space

   To arrive at an eﬃcient, mesh-size independent integration scheme, two crucial questions have to be
addressed, namely, the determination of the vector space (hereafter denoted by V apr
                                                                                   r ) in which the low-dimen-
sional approximation of the stress ﬁeld8 should lie in order to obtain an accurate and at the same time well-
posed ROM; and the calculation of the optimal location of the sampling or integration points. Attention here
and in the next section is conﬁned to the aspect related to the stress approximation space; the issue related to
the selection of sampling points, on the other hand, is examined in Section 7.

5.1. The reduced-order subspace of statically admissible stresses V r

   At ﬁrst sight, the problem of constructing a Oðnu Þ-dimensional representation of the stress ﬁeld seems quite
similar to the problem addressed in Section 3 concerning the reduced basis for the displacement ﬂuctuations:
we have to ﬁnd a set of orthogonal basis functions fW1 ðxÞ; W2 ðxÞ . . . Wnr ðxÞg ðnr ¼ Oðnu ÞÞ such that its span
accurately approximates the set of all possible stress solutions — that is, the set of all statically admissible stres-
ses. Accordingly, following the procedure described in Section 3, we ﬁrst compute ﬁnite element, stress distri-
butions over the RVE for representative macro-strain histories.9 Then, the elastic/inelastic dimensionality
reduction process set forth in Section 3.2.1 is applied to the resulting ensemble of stress solutions

  8
    It was mentioned in the introductory section that the central idea of eﬃcient interpolatory approaches for numerical integration of
reduced-order BVPs is to replace the nonaﬃne term in the integrand by low-dimensional interpolants. In our case, a glance at the reduced-
order equilibrium equation (21) readily reveals that such “oﬀending”, nonaﬃne term is the stress ﬁeld — the reduced B-matrix B  ¼ B ðxÞ
is independent of the input parameter M and hence need not be subject to approximation.
  9
    The most practical and somehow consistent choice regarding these strain trajectories is to use the same as in the computation of the
displacement ﬂuctuations snapshots.
                                J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                         159


fr1 ðxÞ; r2 ðxÞ . . . rnsnp ðxÞg, in order to identify both the elastic and the essential inelastic stress modes. The space
spanned by these modes will be denoted hereafter by V r and termed the reduced-order subspace of statically
admissible stresses:
                     8           Elastic stress modes                        \Essential"; inelastic stress modes
                                                                                                                                9
                     <zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ
                                           ﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{=
      V r ¼ span W1 ðxÞ; W2 ðxÞ; . . . ; Wme ðxÞ; Wme þ1 ðxÞ; Wme þ2 ðxÞ; . . . ; Wnr ðxÞ :                                      ð27Þ
                     :                                                                                                          ;


5.2. Ill-posedness of the HP-ROM

   Let us now try to construct the low-dimensional approximation of the stress ﬁeld, denoted by10 r , as a
                                                                                       
linear combination of the above described stress reduced basis — hence making V apr
                                                                                r ¼ V r — i.e.,
                                            X
                                            nr
      rðx; M ; U  Þ  r ðx; M ; U  Þ ¼    Wi ðxÞci ðM ; U  Þ;                                   ð28Þ
                                                        i¼1

where ci 2 R ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr Þ. This strategy of approximating the oﬀending, nonaﬃne term in the BVP by a lin-
ear combination of pre-computed basis functions — obtained, in turn, from samples of the nonaﬃne term
evaluated at the solution — has been successfully applied by several authors, with no apparent — or at least
not reported — computational pitfalls, to a wide gamut of problems: nonlinear monotonic elliptic and non-
linear parabolic BPVs [33], nonlinear miscible viscous ﬁngering in porous media [17,18], uncertainty quanti-
ﬁcation in inverse problems [31], and nonlinear heat conduction problems [5,6], to cite but a few.
   However, a closer examination of the RVE equilibrium problem reveals that, in this case, this “standard”
strategy proves completely fruitless, for it leads to patently ill-posed reduced-order equations. To show this, let
us ﬁrst substitute approximation (28) into Eq. (21):
      Z                                  Z                         Xnr  Z                 
          T                                 T              
         B ðxÞ rðx; M ; U Þ dX                     
                                            B ðxÞ r ðx; M ; U Þ ¼         B ðxÞWi ðxÞ dX ci ðM ; U  Þ ¼ 0: ð29Þ
                                                                             T

        X                                           X                           i¼1    X

By virtue of Eq. (23), the bracketed integral in the preceding equation can be rephrased as:
     Z                          Z                  
        B T ðxÞWi ðxÞ dX ¼ UT     BT ðxÞWi ðxÞ dX ; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr :                                                             ð30Þ
        X                                       X

Each basis function Wi ðxÞ ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr Þ is, by construction, a linear combination
                                                                                   Pnsnp ofj the stress snapshots col-
lected during the oﬄine, ﬁnite element analysis; thus, we can write Wi ¼ j¼1            bij r ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr Þ; bij 2 R
being the corresponding coeﬃcients in the linear combination. Inserting the above equation into Eq. (30)
and considering that rj (j ¼ 1; 2 . . . nsnp ) are ﬁnite element stress solutions — and therefore fulﬁll the ﬁnite ele-
ment equilibrium equation (8) — we ﬁnally arrive at:
                              ¼0
                       zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
                         Z                     
            X
            nsnp
                                   T j
       UT          bij         B r dX ¼ 0;          i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr ;                                                              ð31Þ
            j¼1           X

that is, the integral (30) appearing in the equilibrium equation (29), and hence, the left-hand side of the equa-
tion itself, vanishes identically regardless of the value of the modal coeﬃcients ci 2 R (i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr ), and
therefore, regardless of the value of the reduced displacement ﬂuctuations U  — hence the ill-posedness.

5.3. Proposed remedy: the expanded space approach

   It is clear from the foregoing discussion that the root cause of the ill-posedness lies in the fact that the set of
all admissible stress ﬁelds (V r ) forms a vector space, and, consequently, the POD stress modes Wi 2 V r

 10
    Notice that, in keeping with the notational convention introduced in Section 4, the low-dimensional approximation of the stress ﬁeld is
represented by attaching an asterisk to the stress symbol.
160                         J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


(i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr ) — and any linear combination of them — turn out to be self-equilibrated ﬁelds. Thus, for the
reduced-order problem to be well-posed, the approximation space V apr      r cannot be only formed by statically
admissible stresses, but it must also include statically inadmissible ﬁelds — i.e., stress functions that do not sat-
isfy the reduced-order equilibrium equation (21).
   One plausible route for determining a low-dimensional approximation space that embraces both statically
admissible and statically inadmissible stresses might be to collect, during the oﬄine ﬁnite element calculations,
not only converged stresses, but also the unconverged ones — i.e., those generated during the corresponding
iterative algorithm — and then perform the POD-based dimensionality reduction over the whole ensemble of
snapshots. In the present work, however, we pursue an approach that precludes the necessity of undertaking
this computationally laborious and in some aspects objectionable — there is no guarantee that the span of
selected, unconverged stress snapshots covers the entire space of statically inadmissible stresses — process.
The idea behind the employed approach was originally conceived, but not fully developed, by the authors
in a recent monograph [35]. Here, the theory underlying such an idea is further elaborated and cast into
the formalisms of functional analysis.

5.3.1. Continuum formulation
   To originate our considerations from a general standpoint, it proves convenient ﬁrst to rephrase the left-
hand side of the reduced-order equilibrium equation (21) as the action of a certain linear operator
          s
G : L2 ðXÞ ! Rnu on the stress ﬁeld over the RVE:
      Z
         B i T r dX ¼ hBi ; riL2 ðXÞ ¼ ðG½rÞi i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu :                                    ð32Þ
         X
                                                                       s
Invoking now the orthogonal decomposition of L2 ðXÞ induced by this operator, one obtains:
              s                            n
       L2 ðXÞ ¼ N ðGÞ          spanfBi gi¼1
                                          u
                                             ;                                                                                           ð33Þ

where N ðGÞ stands for the nullspace of G. Since the RVE equilibrium equation has a vanishing right-hand
side term, it follows that N ðGÞ is actually the space of statically admissible stress ﬁelds. Its orthogonal com-
                    nu
plement, spanfBi gi¼1  , can be therefore construed as the abovementioned space of statically inadmissible stres-
ses. The key fact here is that such a space is inherently nu -dimensional and, thus, there is no need to perform any
dimensionality reduction
                           whatsoever    over unconverged snapshots to arrive at the desired basis: the strain–dis-
placement functions B 1 ; B2 . . . Bnu themselves are linearly independent (albeit not orthogonal) and can thereby
serve this very purpose.
                                                                     s
   According to the preceding decomposition, any r 2 L2 ðXÞ can be resolved as (see Fig. 2):
     r ¼ rad þ rin ; with hrad ; rin iL2 ðXÞ ¼ 0;                                                                ð34Þ
                                       nu
where rad 2 N ðGÞ and rin 2 span B i i¼1       stand for the statically admissible and statically inadmissible com-
ponents of r, respectively. Following the standard approach, the statically admissible component rad — i.e.,




Fig. 2. Expanded space approach. The stress approximation space is expanded so that it embraces, not only the span of the stress POD
                                                                     n                       o
modes, but also the span of the reduced strain–displacement functions B 1 ; B 2 . . . B nu . The reduced-order RVE equilibrium problem boils
down to ﬁnd the reduced displacement ﬂuctuations vector U  that makes the non-equilibrated component rin to vanish ðrin ðU  ; M Þ ¼ 0Þ.
                                  J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                            161


the stress solution we wish to calculate for a given input M — is forced to lie in the span of the POD modes
Wi ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr Þ obtained from converged snapshots:
                         X
                         nr
       rad  r ¼           Wi cad
                                i ;                                                                                                       ð35Þ
                          i¼1

cad                                                                                                     in
 i 2 R ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nr Þ being the corresponding modal coeﬃcients. The non-equilibrated component r , on
the other hand, resides naturally in the span of the reduced strain–displacement functions, so we can directly
write — i.e., without introducing further approximations
               X
               nu
       rin ¼          B i cin
                            i ;                                                                                                           ð36Þ
                i¼1

with cin
      i 2 R ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu Þ. The low-dimensional approximation required in the proposed integration
method, denoted in what follows by rex (the appended superscript “ex” means “stress approximated in the
expanded space”), is ﬁnally obtained as the sum of Eqs. (35) and (36):
                X
                nr          X
                            nu
       rex ¼      Wi cad
                       i  þ    B j cin
                                     i :                                                                                                  ð37Þ
                 i¼1                  j¼1

Substituting the above approximation into the equilibrium equation, one gets:
     Z             Xnu  Z           
          T  ex           T 
        Bi r ¼            B i B j dX cin
                                      i ¼ 0;   i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu :                                                                        ð38Þ
         X                      j¼1     X
                          
Since B 1 ; B2 . . . Bnu are linearly independent functions, it becomes immediately clear that the above equa-
tions holds only if:
                 
       cin
        i ðM ; U Þ ¼ 0;              j ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ;                                                                                 ð39Þ
                                                                s
i.e., if the nu coeﬃcients multiplying B i 2 L2 ðXÞ ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu Þ are identically zero. In adopting the proposed
integration approach, thus, the reduced-order RVE equilibrium problem (21) is transformed into the problem
of ﬁnding, for a given input macroscopic strain tensor M , the reduced displacement ﬂuctuations vector
U  2 Rnu that makes the non-equilibrated component rin (deﬁned in Eq. (36)) to vanish.
    In a nutshell, the ill-posedness exhibited by the discrete problem when adopting the standard approach of using
only POD modes is eliminated by expanding the stress approximation space so that it embraces also the span of
the reduced strain–displacement functions (or strain modes11) Bi 2 L2 ðXÞs (i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ):
                                          8 n stress modes           nu strain modes
                                                                                          9
                                        <zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
                                               r
                                                                    zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{=
                                n
        V apr
          r ¼ Vr
                 
                     span Bi i¼1 ¼ span W1 ; W2 . . . Wnr ; B 1 ; B2 . . . Bnu :
                                 u
                                                                                                                    ð40Þ
                                          :                                               ;


5.3.2. Discrete formulation
   In typical ﬁnite element implementations, both stresses and gradients of shape functions are only calculated
and stored at the Gauss points of the underlying spatial discretization. For practical reasons, thus, it proves
imperative to reformulate the above explained expanded space strategy and treat both magnitudes as spatially
discrete variables, deﬁned only at such Gauss points.
                                                                                 s                 s
   The discrete counterparts of the continuously deﬁned        ﬁelds r 2 L2 ðXÞ and B i 2 L2 ðXÞ (i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ) will
be denoted by S 2 Rng s and B ¼ B1 B2    Bnu 2 Rng s nu , and termed the global stress vector, and the
                                                         

global matrix of strain modes, respectively. The global stress vector S is constructed by stacking the stress vec-
tors rðxg ; Þ 2 Rs (g ¼ 1; 2 . . . ng ) at the Gauss points of the ﬁnite element grid into a single column vector:


 11
    Indeed, functions B i 2 L2 ðXÞs (i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ) can be viewed as ﬂuctuating strain modes, since they are the symmetric gradient of the
displacement ﬂuctuation modes, see Eq. (23).
162                            J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189

                                                                     T
         S :¼ rT ðx1 ; Þ         rT ðx2 ; Þ       rT ðxng ; Þ        :                                                                   ð41Þ
Similarly, the global matrix of strain modes B is constructed as:
                                                 T
      B :¼ B T ðx1 Þ B T ðx2 Þ    BT ðxng Þ :                                                                                           ð42Þ
      Having deﬁnitions (41) and (42) at hand, the approximation of Eq. (22) by Gauss quadrature can be written
as:
        Z                                X
                                         ng
              B i T ðxÞrðx; Þ dX         wg B i T ðxg Þrðxg ; Þ ¼ 0             ) Bi T WS ¼ 0;      i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ;                  ð43Þ
          X                              g¼1

where W is a diagonal matrix containing the weights at each Gauss point:
           2                         3
             w1 I  0   0      0
           6 0    w2 I 0      0 7
           6                         7
     W :¼ 66 ..    ..  ..   ..    .. 7
                                     7                                                                                                         ð44Þ
           4 .      .   .    .     . 5
                      0       0      0       0    wng I
(here, I denotes the s s identity matrix). Assuming that wg > 0 ðg ¼ 1; 2 . . . ng Þ — Gauss quadrature rules
with negative weights are excluded from our considerations — and using the Cholesky decomposition of
WðW ¼ W 1=2 W 1=2 Þ, one can reexpress Eq. (43) as
        B T WS ¼ ðB T W 1=2 ÞðW 1=2 SÞ ¼ 0:                                                                                                  ð45Þ
Deﬁning now the weighted global stress vector and weighted matrix of strain modes as
                     pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T       pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T             pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T      T
     R :¼ W 1=2 S ¼    w1 r ðx1 ; Þ  w2 r ðx2 ; Þ     wng r ðxng ; Þ ;                                                                   ð46Þ
and
                                  h pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ         pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T                                         iT
                                                                                       pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T
         B :¼ W 1=2 B ¼            w1 B T ðx1 Þ  w2 B ðx2 Þ                       wng B ðxng Þ                                           ð47Þ

respectively, and inserting these deﬁnitions into Eq. (41), one ﬁnally arrives at:
        B R ¼ 0                                                                                                                               ð48Þ
or equivalently,
        Bi T R ¼ 0;      i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ;                                                                                                  ð49Þ
which shows that any statically admissible weighted stress vector is orthogonal, in the sense of the standard
euclidean inner product, to the weighted strain modes Bi T (i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu ).
   Comparing Eq. (48) with Eq. (32), it becomes clear that BT plays the same role as operator G in Eq. (32).
In analogy with Eq. (33), thus, we can write
        Rng s ¼ N ðBT Þ         RangeðB Þ                                                                                                   ð50Þ
                 T                                                                                                            T         
where N ðB Þ and RangeðB Þ denote the null space and the range (or column space) of B                                                and B , respec-
tively, and consequently decompose any R 2 Rng s as
        R ¼ Rad þ Rin                                                                                                                          ð51Þ
with Rad 2 N B and Rin 2 RangeðB Þ. As in the continuous case (see Eq. (35), the statically admissible com-
ponent Rad is now approximated by a linear combination of POD basis vectors obtained from converged stress
snapshots12:


12
   The methodology for obtaining these modes using the SVD is similar to that explained in Section 3.2 for the displacement ﬂuctuation
modes.
                             J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189           163

                       X
                       nr
      Rad  R ¼          cad       ad
                           i Wi ¼ Wc ;                                                                               ð52Þ
                       i¼1

where W ¼ ½ W1 W2    Wnr  denotes the (weighted) stress basis matrix and cad 2 Rnr stands for the vector
of modal coeﬃcients associated to such a basis matrix. Likewise, since the non-equilibrated component Rin
pertains to the column space of B , we can directly write
      Rin ¼ B cin ;                                                                                                 ð53Þ
where cin 2 Rnu . The low-dimensional (weighted) stress vector Rex required in the proposed integration meth-
od is ﬁnally obtained as the sum of Eqs. (53) and (52):
      R  Rex ¼ Wcad þ B cin ;                                                                                     ð54Þ
or in a more compact format:
      Rex ¼ Wex c:                                                                                                  ð55Þ
where
      Wex :¼ ½W B                                                                                                  ð56Þ
and
            ad 
            c
        c ¼ in :                                                                                                     ð57Þ
            c
   The matrix Wex 2 Rng s ðnu þnr Þ deﬁned by Eq. (56) will be hereafter called the expanded basis matrix for the
(weighted) stresses, whereas c 2 Rnr þnu will be correspondingly termed the expanded vector of modal coeﬃ-
cients. Inserting approximation (54) into Eq. (48), and considering that BT W ¼ 0 and that BT is a full rank
matrix, one ﬁnally arrives at the same equilibrium condition derived in the continuum case (see Eq. (39)):
      cin ðU  ; M Þ ¼ 0:                                                                                           ð58Þ
  Once the above equation is solved for U  , the desired equilibrated stress vector R is obtained by evaluating
Eq. (52):
      R ¼ Wcad ðU  ; M Þ:                                                                                         ð59Þ


6. The High-Performance ROM

   The next step in the development of the proposed integration scheme is to deduce closed-form expressions
for the vectors of modal coeﬃcients cad 2 Rnr and cin 2 Rnu in terms of the stress values computed at a set of
p ¼ Oðnu Þ pre-speciﬁed sampling points (to be chosen among the set of Gauss points of the underlying ﬁnite
element mesh). To this end, we need ﬁrst to introduce some notation and terminology.

6.1. Gappy vectors

    Let I ¼ fI 1 ; I 2 . . . I p g  f1; 2    ng g denote the set of indices of sampling points. Notationally, we write
^ ðI Þ 2 Rps to designate the subvector of R containing the rows associated to these sampling points; viz.:
R
                                                                                     T
        ^ ðI Þ :¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
        R           wI 1 rT ðxI 1 ; Þ
                                        pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T
                                          wI 2 r ðxI 2 ; Þ   
                                                                  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T
                                                                    wI p r ðxI p ; Þ                                 ð60Þ

(When confusion is not apt to arise, the parenthetical subscript indicating the set of sampling indices will be
dropped, and we shall simply write R).    ^ It proves conceptually advantageous to regard this restricted or
“gappy” — a terminology that goes back to the work of Everson et al. [28] — stress vector R          ^ ðI Þ as the
result of the application of a certain boolean operator P ðI Þ : Rng s ! Rps over the full vector R (i.e.,
^ ¼ P ðI Þ R). We call P ðI Þ the selection operator associated to sampling indices I . This operator can be of
R
164                               J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


course applied to any Y 2 Rng s z (z 2 N). For instance, the restricted matrix of weighted strain modes is
          ^  :¼ P ðI Þ B . Furthermore, it is straightforward to show that
deﬁned as B
      P ðI Þ P TðI Þ ¼ I                                                                                           ð61Þ
(here I is the ðng  sÞ            ðng  sÞ identity matrix) and that
      P ðI Þ ðAYÞ ¼ ðP ðI Þ AP TðI Þ ÞðP ðI Þ YÞ                                                                   ð62Þ
for any A 2 Rng s ng s and Y 2 Rng s z .

6.2. Least-squares ﬁt

   In the spirit of classical polynomial quadrature, such as Newton–Cotes formulae [36], the modal coeﬃcients
cad 2 Rnr and cin 2 Rnu are determined by ﬁtting the low-dimensional approximation (54) to the weighted
stresses calculated at the pre-speciﬁed sampling points. It should be noticed that, the variable subject to
approximation — the stress — being a vector-valued function, the total number of discrete points to be
ﬁtted does not coincide with the number of spatial sampling points (p), but rather is equal to the product
of such a number times the number of stress components (s). The well-posedness of the ﬁtting problem,
thus, demands that p  s P nr þ nu , i.e., the number of discrete points must be equal or greater than the
number of parameters to be adjusted. For the equality to hold, both nr þ nu and p have to be multiple of
s; thus, an exact ﬁt is in general not possible for arbitrary values of nr and nu , and recourse to an
approximate ﬁt is to be made. In this respect, we follow here the standard approach of using a least-
squares, best-ﬁt criterion, i.e., minimization of the squares of the deviations between “observed” (R)^ and
ﬁtted (R          ^ þB
         ^ ex ¼ Wa    ^  b) values (in our context, “observed” signiﬁes “calculated through the pertinent
constitutive equation”). This minimization problem can be stated as:
              ad 
               c                              ^ þB
                                         ^  ðWa ^  bÞk
       c ¼ in ¼ arg            min kR                                                                    ð63Þ
               c            a2Rnr ;b2Rnu

                                                        ^ ex ¼ P ðI Þ W
where k  k stands for the standard euclidean norm. Let W             ^ ex ¼ ½W
                                                                              ^ B^   be the gappy expanded basis
                                                                                ^
matrix, and suppose that the sampling indices I have been chosen so that Wex has full rank, i.e.:
           ^ ex Þ ¼ rankð½W
      rankðW              ^ B
                            ^  Þ ¼ nr þ nu :                                                                     ð64Þ
Then, it can be shown (see, for instance, Ref. [23]) that the solution of this standard, least-squares problem is
provided by the following vector of coeﬃcients:
           ad 
            c      ^ exy R;
                         ^
      c ¼ in ¼ W                                                                                             ð65Þ
            c
where
                           ^ 1
                           M
            zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
             T             1
      ^ exy
      W :¼ W  ^ ex W   ^ ex        ^ exT
                                   W                                                                               ð66Þ

is the so-called pseudo-inverse of matrix W   ^ ex .
                                                                                                       ^ Thus, it
    Recall that our ultimate aim is to derive closed-form expressions for cin and cad as functions of R.
remains to extricate these two sub-vectors from expression (65). This can be done by ﬁrst partitioning both
M^ ¼W  ^ exT W
             ^ ex and W
                      ^ exT in terms of the gappy stress basis matrix W
                                                                      ^ and the gappy matrix of strain modes B
                                                                                                             ^ :
              ad  " ^ T ^ ^ T  #1 " ^ T #
              c          W W W B      ^      W ^
       c ¼ in ¼                                      R:                                                     ð67Þ
               c        B^ W
                           T
                              ^ B  T
                                  ^ B ^     ^ T
                                             B
Invoking the blockwise inverse formula for 2 2 block symmetric matrices [11], and upon tedious algebra —
that has been relegated to Appendix C — one ﬁnally arrives at the following expressions for cad and cin
                            J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189      165


     cad ¼ W^ y ðR
                 ^ B   ^  cin Þ;                                                                            ð68Þ
     cin ¼ S1 B ^ T ðI  W ^W  ^ y ÞR;
                                      ^                                                                       ð69Þ
      ^ y denotes the pseudoinverse of the gappy stress basis matrix W:
where W                                                              ^

     ^ y ¼ ðW
     W          ^ 1 W
            ^ T WÞ   ^T                                                                                       ð70Þ
           ^ T       ^ ^y
and S :¼ B ðI  WW Þ (note that S is invertible by virtue of the hypothesis represented by Eq. (64)).

6.2.1. Reconstruction matrix
   Let us ﬁrst examine expression (68) for the modal coeﬃcients cad — those that multiply the statically admis-
sible component of the global stress vector. Since, at the solution, cin ¼ 0, we have that:
               0             1
                         ¼0
                        z}|{
            ^ yB
      cad ¼ W  @R^ B^  cin C
                             A¼W ^ y R:
                                     ^                                                                     ð71Þ


(Notice that this result can also be obtained by directly solving minimization problem (63) with b ¼ 0). Sub-
stitution of this equation into Eq. (59) yields:
                          R
                 zﬄ}|ﬄ{
          ^ ad ¼ WW
     R ¼ Wc        ^y R^ ¼ R R;
                              ^                                                                               ð72Þ
where
           ^ y ¼ WðW
     R :¼ WW           ^ 1 W
                   ^ T WÞ   ^T:                                                                               ð73Þ
                                                                 ng s ps
Inspection of Eq. (72) reveals that the matrix R 2 R           deﬁned above is the operator that allows one to
reconstruct the (weighted) statically admissible stress vector R 2 Rng s using only the (weighted) stress values
ðR^ 2 Rps Þ calculated at the pre-selected sampling points I . For this reason, we shall use the term weighted
reconstruction matrix (or simply reconstruction matrix) to refer to this operator. It must be emphasized here
that this matrix only depends on the POD stress basis matrix W and on the selected sampling indices I — i.e.,
it is independent of the input parameter, the macro-strain M — and, therefore, it can be pre-computed oﬄine.

6.3. “Hyperreduced” RVE equilibrium equation

   As for the expression for the set of “statically inadmissible” coeﬃcients cin 2 Rnu , we know that, at the solu-
tion, these coeﬃcients must vanish; thus, from Eq. (69), we have
                           ^ T ðI  W
     cin ðU  ; M Þ ¼ S1 B         ^W^ y ÞRðU
                                            ^  ; M Þ ¼ 0:                                                   ð74Þ
Since S is a nonsingular matrix, the above condition is equivalent to
     ^ T ðI  W
     B         ^W^ y ÞRðU
                      ^  ; M Þ ¼ 0:                                                                         ð75Þ
                                                                                     ^W
Furthermore, examination of Eqs. (73) and (75) readily shows that the bracketed term W ^ y in Eq. (75) is noth-
ing but the submatrix of the reconstruction matrix R formed by the rows associated to sampling points I , i.e.:
     ^W
     W ^ y ¼ P ðI Þ ðWW
                      ^ y Þ ¼ P ðI Þ R ¼ R:
                                         ^                                                                    ð76Þ
Substitution of expression (76) into Eq. (75) ﬁnally leads to:
     ^ T ðI  RÞ
     B         ^ RðU
                  ^  ; M Þ ¼ 0:                                                                             ð77Þ
                                                                                    in   
As previously noted (see Fig. 2), the purpose of enforcing condition c ðU ; M Þ ¼ 0 is to ensure that the stress
solution lies entirely in the space of equilibrated stresses. Eq. (77) can be viewed, thus, as the “hyperreduced”
form of the original RVE equilibrium equation.
166                         J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


Observation 6.1. The “hyperreduced” qualiﬁer — coined by Ryckelynck [57,58] — is used here to indicate that
Eq. (77) is the result of two subsequent steps of complexity reduction: ﬁrstly, in the number of degrees of
freedom (when passing from the ﬁnite element model to the ROM that employs standard Gauss quadrature),
and, secondly, in the number of integration points (when passing from this standard ROM to what we have
baptized13 “High-Performance” ROM). This double complexity reduction can be better appreciated by
rephrasing both Eq. (77) and the FE Eq. (9) in a format similar to that of Eq. (48), viz.:
             ^ T
             B
      zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
      ^ T ðI  RÞ
      B             ^ R    ^ T R
                         ^¼B     ^ ¼0                                                                                            ð78Þ
and
      X
      ng
             wg B T ðxg Þrðxg ; ;Þ ¼ BT R ¼ 0;                                                                                   ð79Þ
       g¼1

respectively (here, B 2 Rng s nd is the ﬁnite element counterpart of B , deﬁned in Eq. (42). With Eqs. (79), (48)
and (78) at our disposal, the abovementioned process of complexity reduction can be symbolically represented
as

          FEM
                     1st reduc: Stand: ROM 2nd reduc: HP-ROM
      zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ n  d ! nu zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ ng ! p zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄTﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
      BT R ¼ 0            )     B T R ¼ 0         )    ^  R
                                                        B         ^ ¼ 0;                                                         ð80Þ

                                                         ^  2 Rps nu being B ¼ BU and
the relation between B 2 Rng s nd ; B 2 Rng s nu and B

      B            ^ B
      ^  :¼ ðI  RÞ            ^ ðIÞ B
                      ^  ¼ ðI  RÞP                                                                                             ð81Þ

with p ¼ Oðnu Þ  ng ¼ OðnÞ. It is interesting to see how the reduction in complexity of the RVE equilibrium
equation is reﬂected in the gradual reduction of the dimensions of the “B” operators that act on the weighted
vector of stresses.

6.3.1. Physical interpretation
   Aside from a “compressed” version of the original, full-order cell condition, the hyperreduced equation (77)
can be alternatively interpreted as a balance between “observed” and “ﬁtted” internal forces at the selected
sampling points. Such an interpretation becomes readily identiﬁable by realizing that the product R     ^R
                                                                                                         ^ appear-
ing in Eq. (77) is but the (weighted) vector of ﬁtted stresses at the selected sampling points. Indeed, by virtue of
Eq. (72) and, considering the properties of the selection operator P ðI Þ , we have that
      ^R
      R ^ ¼ P ðIÞ ðRRÞ
                    ^ ¼ P ðI Þ R ¼ R
                                    ^ :                                                                                         ð82Þ
Using the above equality, Eq. (77) is expressible as B      ^ T R  ^ T R
                                                                 ^ ¼B    ^  , or, reverting to the original, summation
notation as
     X                           X
         wj BT ðxj Þrðxj ; Þ ¼  wj B T ðxj Þr ðxj ; Þ:                                                        ð83Þ
       j2I                          j2I

   Note that both sides of the above equation represent the same physical quantity, namely, the sum of inter-
nal forces, in reduced coordinates, at the sampling Gauss points fxI 1 ; xI 2    xI p g. The diﬀerence lies in the
stresses employed for computing these internal forces. In the left-hand side, they are calculated using
“observed” stresses r — stresses that arises directly from evaluating the corresponding constitutive equation
— whereas, in the right-hand side, “ﬁtted” stresses r are used — that is, stresses obtained from ﬁtting the

13
    The term high-performance, reduced-order model (HP-ROM) is used to highlight the tremendous gains in performance that affords this
model over the standard ROM, let alone over the full-order, ﬁnite model. In the numerical example shown in Section 9, we report speedup
factors of above three order of magnitudes.
                             J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                                  167


approximation constructed using the POD stress basis functions W1 ; W2 . . . Wnr to the observed data. Thus, the
HP-ROM equilibrium condition (83) is telling us that, at the solution, the sum of internal forces — at the pre-
selected sampling points — computed using either observed or ﬁtted stresses14 must coincide.

6.4. Jacobian matrix

   Needless to say, the dependence of the stresses on the reduced vector of reduced displacement ﬂuctuations
U  is in general non-linear, and, thereby, an iterative method is required for solving Eq. (77). Here we employ
the standard Newton–Raphson procedure. The iterative scheme corresponding to this procedure is given by the
following expression (the parenthetical superscript indicates iteration number):
                                    1
       U ðkþ1Þ ¼ U ðkÞ  K ðkÞ F ðkÞ ;                                                                                                 ð84Þ
where
                    T
       F ðkÞ ¼ B        ^ Rð
                ^  ðI  RÞ ^ M ; U ðkÞ Þ                                                                                                 ð85Þ
and
                ^ T ðI  RÞ
       K ðkÞ ¼ B            ^ M ; U ðkÞ Þ B
                          ^ Cð             ^ :                                                                                           ð86Þ
In the above equation, C ^ 2 Rps ps denotes a block diagonal matrix containing the algorithmic, constitutive
tangent matrices at each sampling point:
           2                                          3
             CðxI 1 ; Þ    0        0        0
           6    0        CðxI 2 ; Þ 0        0    7
           6                                          7
      ^    6
      C :¼ 6     ..         ..       ..  ..      ..   7:                                                  ð87Þ
                                                      7
           4      .          .        .   .       .   5
                        0           0         0    0     CðxI p ; Þ


6.4.1. Positive deﬁniteness
   Because of its relevance in the overall robustness of the proposed method, it is worthwhile at this point to
digress and discuss thoroughly the spectral properties of the Jacobian matrix represented by Eq. (86). In par-
ticular, it would be interesting to ascertain whether positive deﬁniteness of the algorithmic tangent matrices
                                                                                             ^ ensures positive deﬁnite-
CðxI 1 ; Þ; CðxI 2 ; Þ;    CðxI p Þ at the selected sampling points, and thus of matrix C,
                                          
ness of the Jacobian matrix K — as it occurs when using classical Gauss quadrature rules with positive
weights — and, if not, which remedies can be applied to obtain such desirable property.
   Positive deﬁniteness of the Jacobian matrix (86) requires that the function deﬁned as
                                         T
       F ðUÞ ¼ UT K  U ¼ ðB              ^ B
                                       ^ Cð
                           ^  UÞ ðI  RÞ   ^  UÞ                                                                                         ð88Þ
                                             ^  is a full rank matrix — by virtue of Eq. (64) — condition
be positive for all non-zero U 2 Rnu . Since B
F ðUÞ > 0 is equivalent to:
                      ^ C
       GðVÞ ¼ VT ðI  RÞ ^ V>0                                                                                                             ð89Þ
for all non-zero V 2 RangeðB ^  Þ.
                                              ^ 2 Rng s ng s — recall that R
   To go further, we need to demonstrate that R                              ^ is the matrix that maps the vector
of “observed” stresses R to the vector of ﬁtted stresses R — actually represents an orthogonal projection15
                       ^                                  ^  

onto the column space of the gappy stress basis matrix W.   ^ This can be shown by simply noting that R      ^ is,
on the one hand, symmetric:

 14
    It should be mentioned in this respect that, in general, r ðxj ; Þ – rðxj ; Þ since the number of data items to be ﬁtted (p  s) is always
greater than the number of stress modes (nr ). Observed and ﬁtted stresses coincide only when the stress vector R one wishes to
approximate pertains to the column space of the stress basis matrix W.    ^
 15 ^
    R is the so-called “hat” matrix of linear regression models [51].
168                         J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189

                                   T
             ^ W
      ^ T ¼ ðWð
      R             ^ 1 W
                ^ T WÞ   ^ T Þ ¼ Wð
                                 ^ W    ^ T W
                                    ^ T WÞ   ^T ¼ R
                                                  ^                                                             ð90Þ
and, on the other hand, idempotent:
                                           ¼I
                     zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
      ^ 2  ^ ^    y 2
                   ^  ^ T WÞ
      R ¼ ðW W Þ ¼ W ðW      ^ 1 W  ^TW   ^ ðW   ^ 1 W
                                              ^ T WÞ   ^ T ¼ Wð
                                                             ^ W    ^ 1 W
                                                                ^ T WÞ   ^ T ¼ R:
                                                                               ^                                ð91Þ
With this property at hand, we can decompose any V 2 RangeðB Þ as              ^

      V ¼ Vk þ V?                                                                                ð92Þ
        k
where V ¼ RV ^ 2 RangeðWÞ  ^ — the component of V along the column space of W
                                                                            ^ — and V ¼ ðI  RÞV
                                                                                      ?       ^    —
the component of V along the orthogonal complement of RangeðWÞ. ^ Introducing the above decomposition
into Eq. (89), we arrive at
              T                T
      G ¼ V? CV ^ ? þ V? CV  ^ k:                                                                        ð93Þ
                       ?T ^ ?                                                                   ^ eminently
While the ﬁrst term V CV in the preceding equation is, in virtue of the positive deﬁniteness of C,
                           ?     ps                                                      ?T ^ k
positive for all nonzero V 2 R , nothing can be said in principle about the second term V CV : numerical
experience shows that the sign and relative magnitude of this term depends further on the chosen set of sam-
pling indices I .
Remark 6.1. From the above observation, it follows that the positive deﬁniteness of the Jacobian matrix K  is
                                                   ^ but — not surprisingly — also by the number and the
determined, not only by the spectral properties of C,
location within the RVE of the sampling points employed in the integration.
   The foregoing remark naturally leads to wonder whether it is possible to select the sampling indices I so as
                                                                     ^ enjoys this property). To shed light on
to ensure the positive deﬁniteness of K  (assuming, obviously, that C
                                               ?T ^ ?
this question, let us ﬁrst divide Eq. (93) by V CV (notice that hypothesis (64) precludes the possibility of V?
being zero)
                                       T
              G              ^ k
                         V? CV
      ¼
      G      T     ¼ 1 þ   T     :                                                                              ð94Þ
               ^ ?
           V? CV             ^ ?
                         V? CV
                                            ^ is also symmetric. Such being the case, the above equation can
Suppose now, for the sake of argument, that C
be legitimately rewritten as:
                                            k
       ¼ 1 þ cos ðV? ; Vk Þ ^ kV kC^ ;
      G                                                                                                         ð95Þ
                            C
                               kV? kC^
where
                             hV? ; Vk iC^
      cos ðV? ; Vk ÞC^ ¼                    :                                                                   ð96Þ
                            kV? kC^ kVk kC^
In the above equation, h; iC^ symbolizes the inner product deﬁned by C  ^ (i.e., hx; yi ^ ¼ xT Cy),
                                                                                                 ^    whereas k  kC^
                                                                                         C
denotes the norm associated to such an inner product ðkxk2C^ ¼ hx; xiC^ Þ. From Eq. (94), it can be deduced that
a suﬃcient (yet not necessary) condition for G   > 0, and thus for K  to be positive deﬁnite, is that

      kVk kC^
              <1                                                                                                ð97Þ
      kV? kC^
                          ^  Þ, or equivalently (setting V ¼ B
for all nonzero V 2 RangeðB                                   ^  U):
          ^B
         kR ^  Uk ^
                    C
                         <1                                                                                     ð98Þ
            ^ B
      kðI  RÞ  ^  Uk ^
                        C

for all nonzero U 2 Rnu .
                                 J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189        169


    Useful guidelines on how to choose I so as to make positive deﬁnite the Jacobian matrix K  can be inferred
from inequality (98). Firstly, given a ﬁxed number of sampling points p, expression (98) indicates that such
points should be selected so that the columns of the gappy strain basis matrix
                           
^  ¼ P ðI Þ B ¼ B
B                 ^ B      ^  are, loosely speaking, “as orthogonal as possible” to rangeðRÞ
                      ^ ...B                                                                   ^ ¼ RangeðWÞ  ^
                         1       2     nu
— the column space of the gappy stress basis matrix W^ ¼ P ðI Þ W. In so doing, the factor deﬁned as
             qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                  Pnu ^  2ﬃ
                                  ^ ^
                       i¼1 kRBi kC
    fC^ :¼ qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
            Pnu                                    ;                                                                  ð99Þ
                      kðI         ^ B
                                   RÞ   ^ i k2^
                 i¼1                           C

would diminish, and so would, consequently, the left-hand side of inequality Eq. (98). In practice, however,
factor fC^ cannot be used as a criterion for guiding the selection of sampling points, simply because it is deﬁned
in terms of the norm induced by C,            ^ and this matrix virtually changes at every time step and iteration. One has
to be content to estimate this factor using other norm; for instance, employing the standard euclidean norm
k  k, one gets
                     qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                        Pnu ^  2ﬃ
                                        ^
                             i¼1 kRBi k                       ^B
                                                             kR ^ k
                                                                     F
       fC^ fF :¼ qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                    Pnu                               ﬃ ¼                  ;                                          ð100Þ
                                         ^    ^   2      kðI  ^ B
                                                                RÞ  ^ k
                       i¼1 kðI  RÞBi k
                                                                         F


where k  kF stands for the Frobenius norm.
                                                    ^ expression (99) suggests that another way of lowering
                                            ^  and R,
   Aside from seeking orthogonality between B
factor fF may be to reduce the ratio deﬁned as
                  ^
                 kRk F
      bF :¼            :                                                                                             ð101Þ
                    ^
               kI  Rk       F
      ^ and, consequently, I  R
Since R                             ^ are matrices representing orthogonal projections, we have that
       qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
 ^ ¼ rankðRÞ              p ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                               ﬃ    ^ ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                    ^ ¼ nr and kI  Rk
kRk F                                  F   p  s  nr . Therefore,
           rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                   nr
      bF ¼                     :                                                                                     ð102Þ
            p  s  nr


Observation 6.2. From the above expression, thus, one can conclude that increasing the number of sampling
points p while keeping the number of stress modes nr constant also contributes to reduce factor fF in Eq. (98),
and, hence, to improve the spectral properties (positive deﬁniteness) of the Jacobian matrix K  . Notice that
this property is totally consistent with the fact that, in the limiting case of taking all Gauss points (p ¼ ng ), the
reduced matrices R  ^ and B^  degenerate into their full order counterparts R and B , for which the condition
     
R B ¼ 0 holds — they span subspaces that are mutually orthogonal — hence making fF ¼ fC^ ¼ 0.

7. Selection of sampling points

   The last theoretical issue to be discussed in the present work is the selection — among the full set of Gauss
points of the underlying ﬁnite element mesh — of appropriate sampling or interpolation points. At the very
least, the set of sampling indices I ¼ fi1 ; i2 . . . ip g must be chosen so that the gappy expanded basis matrix
has full rank (see Section 6.2):
                         h              i
       rank W^ ex ¼ rank W    ^ ðI Þ B
                                     ^       ¼ nr þ nu :                                                   ð103Þ
               ðI Þ                   ðI Þ


Any set of sampling indices fulﬁlling this necessary condition is said to be admissible.
170                          J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


7.1. Optimality criteria

7.1.1. Accuracy
   As in any other model reduction problem, the overriding concern when choosing the sampling points is the
accuracy of the approximation: we would like to position such points so that maximum similarity between the
“high-ﬁdelity”, ﬁnite element solution and its reduced-order counterpart is obtained. More speciﬁcally, since
the output of interest in our BVP is the macroscopic stress response, the aim is to ﬁnd the set of sampling
points I that minimizes the following error estimate:
                      vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                      u nsnp
                      uX
      EM;r ðW; I Þ :¼ t kriM  ri
                                                                  2
                                               M ðW; I Þk ;                                            ð104Þ
                              i¼1


where riM ¼ rM ðt Mkj Þ denotes the ﬁnite element, macroscopic stress response corresponding to the kth
(k ¼ 1; 2 . . . nstp ) time step of the “training”16 strain trajectory t M j (j ¼ 1; 2 . . . nhst ); and riM ðW; I Þ its low-
dimensional approximation.
   Using the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, and approximating the pertinent integrals by Gauss quadrature, we
can write
                      nsnp Z
                 1X                                          1X
                                                               nsnp X
                                                                    ng
                                                                        pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ       pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
     E2M;r 6                 kri ðxÞ  ri ðx; W; I Þk2 dX            k wg ri ðxg Þ  wg ri ðxg ; W; I Þk2
                 V i¼1 X                                     V i¼1 g¼1

              1X snp  n
                                       2   1                 2
               ¼     kRi  Ri ðW; I Þk 2 ¼ kX  X  ðW; I ÞkF ;                                         ð105Þ
              V i¼1                        V
                                   
where X ¼ R1 R2    Rnsnp and X  ðW; I Þ ¼ RðI Þ ðPðI ÞXÞ. The error estimate for the macroscopic stres-
ses deﬁned in Eq. (104) is, thus, bounded above by the Frobenius norm of the diﬀerence between the
(weighted) stress snapshot matrix X and its oblique projection, X  , onto RangeðWÞ. This bound, hereafter des-
ignated by er , admits the following decomposition17
               1                   1
       e2r ¼     kX  X ? ðWÞk2F þ kX ? ðWÞ  X  ðW; I Þk2F ;                                                                       ð106Þ
               V                   V
X ? being the orthogonal projection of X onto the range of W,    ^ i.e., X ? ¼ WWT X. Note that the ﬁrst term of
the right-hand side of Eq. (106) only depends on the stress basis matrix, but not on the employed sampling
indices; it provides, thus, an estimate of the stress truncation error. The term that actually measures the quality,
in terms of accuracy, of a given set of admissible sampling points is the second one — it provides an (a priori)
estimate of the stress reconstruction error. We shall denote this term by erec  r :

                   1
       erec
        r :¼         kX ? ðWÞ  X  ðW; I ÞkF :                                                                                       ð107Þ
                   V
For this reason — and also because the cost of evaluating expression Eq. (107) is independent of the number
of Gauss points,18 and therefore signiﬁcantly lower than in the case of the original error estimate EM;r — we
shall use in what follows erec
                           r as error estimator for guiding the selection of sampling points.


7.1.2. Spectral properties
   Yet the optimality of a given set of sampling points cannot be measured only in terms of accuracy of the
approximation. As demonstrated in Section 6.4, the number and particular placement of such points inﬂuence
also the spectral properties (positive deﬁniteness) of the Jacobian matrix of the equilibrium equation, and

 16
    The term “training”, which, incidentally, is borrowed from the neural network literature [38], is used throughout the text to refer to the
oﬄine generation of snapshots.
 17
    This decomposition follows easily from the Pythagorean theorem (just notice that WT ðX  X ? Þ ¼ 0).
 18
    Indeed, since W is column-wise orthogonal, minimizing Eq. (107) is equivalent to minimizing the diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients of
the respective projections. The number of coeﬃcients is equal to the number of snapshots, which is normally much lower than the number
of Gauss points.
                             J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                       171


therefore, the convergence characteristics of the accompanying Newton–Raphson algorithm. We saw that, to
preserve the positive deﬁniteness of the full-order Jacobian matrix, one should strive to choose the sampling
indices I so as to make the factor — deﬁned previously in Eq. (100)
                               ^ ðI Þ B
                              kR      ^ k
                                        ðI Þ F
      fF ðW; B ; I Þ ¼                                                                                                        ð108Þ
                           kðI  R^ ðI Þ ÞB
                                          ^ k
                                              ðIÞ F

as small as possible.

7.2. Optimization approach: basic and stabilizing sampling points

   Unfortunately, the minimization of the approximation error represented by expression Eq. (107) and the
minimization of Eq. (108) are in general conﬂicting goals. For instance, numerical experiments show that
when the selection is driven exclusively by accuracy considerations, the resulting Jacobian matrix becomes
indeﬁnite at certain states of deformation — especially when inelastic deformations are severe — leading occa-
sionally to convergence failures. These goals must be therefore balanced in order to arrive at an accurate and
at the same time robust solution scheme.
   To accommodate these conﬂicting requirements, we propose here a heuristic strategy that basically consists
in treating the minimization of Eqs. (107) and (108) as two separated, sequential problems — in the spirit of
the so-called “greedy” optimization algorithms19 [44]. The set of sampling points is assumed to be divided into
two disjoint subsets I r and I B :
      I ¼ I r [ I B:                                                                                                           ð109Þ
The ﬁrst subset I r ¼ fi1 ; i2 ;    ipr g is obtained as the minimizer of the error estimation given in Eq. (107), viz.:
      I r ¼ arg        min       erec
                                  r ðW; KÞ:                                                                                    ð110Þ
                   K # f1;2...ng g

Once the set I r is determined, the remaining sampling indices I B ¼ fj1 ; j2    jpB g ðpr þ pB ¼ pÞ are calculated as
      I B ¼ arg        min           fF ðW; B ; I r [ KÞ:                                                                     ð111Þ
                   K # f1;2...ng g



Remark 7.1. It must be noted here that the minimization problem represented by Eq. (110) is in essence the
same problem addressed in (standard) interpolatory-based, model reduction approaches for determining,
given a set of empirical basis functions, the optimal location of associated interpolations points. For this
reason, we shall refer to the set of points arising from solving this minimization problem as the standard or
basic sampling points — these are, for instance, the Best Interpolation Points of Nguyen et al. [53]. By contrast,
the necessity of introducing points that attempt to solve problem (111) is a consequence of expanding the
stress approximation space in the ﬁrst place — the main innovative feature of our approach — and it is
therefore not present in other model reduction strategies. We shall call fxI B ð1Þ ; xI B ð2Þ . . . xI B ðpB Þ g the set of
stabilizing sampling points.

    The number of basic sampling points must satisfy the necessary condition pr P nr =s. In general, taking
pr ¼ nr suﬃces to ensure highly satisfactory approximations. How many, on the other hand, stabilizing sam-
pling points have to be added to safely render positive deﬁnite the Jacobian matrix — for at least a represen-
tative range of macroscopic state deformations — is a question that can only be answered empirically. In the
examples presented in the next section, it has been found that a conservative answer is to use as many stabi-
lizing sampling points as displacement basis modes ðpB ¼ nu Þ.
    To deal with the discrete minimization problem (110), we have used here the Hierarchical Interpolation
Points (HPI) method proposed by Nguyen et al. [53]. The essence of this method is to construct, in a
greedy fashion, the set of indices by solving a sequence of one-dimensional minimization problems. The

 19
    A greedy method is any algorithm that solves the problem by making the locally optimal choice at each step with the hope of ﬁnding
the global optimum.
172                        J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


minimization problem (111) is also addressed using a heuristic based on the greedy paradigm. In particular,
the kth (k ¼ 1; 2 . . . pB ) index is selected by solving the following, one-dimensional minimization problem:
      I B ðkÞ ¼ arg      min fF ðW; B ; KðjÞÞ                                                                     ð112aÞ
                      j2f1;2...ng g

      K ¼ I r [ fI B ð1Þ; I B ð2Þ    I B ðk  1Þ; jg:                                                          ð112bÞ


8. Summary

  Lastly, for the reader’s convenience and easy reference, the online reduced-order problem, along with the
oﬄine steps that leads to the hyperreduced operators appearing in the online problem, are summarized in
Boxes 8.1 and 8.2.

Box 8.1. Oﬄine stage. Pre-computation of reduced basis and hyperreduced operators.


  1. Compute FE displacement ﬂuctuations and stress snaphots for representative, input macro-strain his-
     tories. Apply — see Appendix B — the elastic/inelastic POD to the resulting snapshot matrices to obtain
     the displacement ﬂuctuation and stress basis matrices (U 2 Rnd nu and W 2 Rng s nr , respectively).
  2. Calculate the weighted matrix of ﬂuctuating strain modes B 2 Rng s nr using Eqs. (26) and (47).
  3. Select a set I of sampling indices optimal for the basis matrices W and B following the procedure
     sketched in Section 7.
  4. Finally, using W; B and I , construct the hyperreduced-order matrices B^  2 Rps nu and T 2 Rs ps ; the
     expressions for these matrices read:
                     ^ B
         ^  ¼ ðI  RÞ
         B              ^  ¼ ðI  P ðI Þ RÞðP ðI Þ B Þ                                                          ð113Þ
      and
              1  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ           pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 
         T :¼      w1 I      w2 I       wng I R                                                                ð114Þ
             V
      where R ¼ WðW      ^ 1 W
                     ^ T WÞ   ^ T and W ^ ¼ P ðI Þ W.




Box 8.2. Online stage (solution of the hyperreduced-order RVE equilibrium problem for given macroscopic
strains).


  1. Initial data: U n 2 Rnu (reduced vector of displacement ﬂuctuations at tn ), Mn (macroscopic strain vector
     at tn ), and fnn ðxI 1 Þ; nn ðxI 2 Þ; . . . nn ðxI p Þg (internal variables at tn at the selected sampling points).
  2. Input data: Mnþ1 (macroscopic strain vector at tnþ1 ).
  3. Given the above initial and input data, ﬁnd U nþ1 2 Rnu such that
         ^ T R
               ^ Mnþ1 ; U 
         B                 nþ1 ¼ 0;                                                                               ð115Þ
      where
                                                                                     T
         ^ ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
         R    wI 1 rT ðxI 1 ; Þ
                                      pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ T
                                       wI 2 r ðxI 2 ; Þ      wI p rT ðxI p ; Þ                               ð116Þ
     (here, rðxI i ; Þ denotes the stress vector evaluated at the i  th sampling point through the correspond-
     ing constitutive equation).
  4. Output data: Once Eq. (116) has been solved for U nþ1 , update the macroscopic stress vector as
                     ^ Mnþ1 ; U  :
         rM jnþ1 ¼ T R                                                                                            ð117Þ
                                 nþ1
                           J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                           173


9. Numerical results

   This section is intended to illustrate the performance and assess the eﬃciency of the proposed model reduc-
tion strategy in solving the ﬁne scale BVP corresponding to a porous metal material under plane strain
conditions.

9.1. Microstructure description

   The voids are elliptical in shape (with eccentricity equal to 0.3), randomly distributed (with porosity equal
to 0.3), and have aligned major axes ranging in length — according to the cumulative probability distribution
displayed in Fig. 3(b) — from 0.2 to 1.5 mm. The mechanical behavior of the metal matrix is modeled by a
rate-independent, Von Mises elastoplastic model endowed with the following non-linear, isotropic hardening
saturation law (consult Ref. [60] for details on the implementation of this elastoplastic model):
                     a þ ðr1  r0 Þð1  expðadÞÞ:
      ru ðaÞ ¼ r0 þ H                                                                                      ð118Þ
Here, ru stands for the yield stress, a P 0 denotes the equivalent plastic strain; and
r0 ¼ 75:0 MPa; r1 ¼ 100:0 MPa; d ¼ 2500:0 and H    ¼ 5000 MPa are material constants. The Young’s mod-
ulus and Poisson’s coeﬃcient, on the other hand, are equal to Em ¼ 75 GPa and mm ¼ 0:3, respectively (these
material constants corresponds approximately to Aluminum).

9.2. RVE and ﬁnite element discretization

   The size of the RVE was determined by conducting ﬁnite element analyses on square domains of increasing
size subject to vanishing displacement ﬂuctuations boundary conditions. It was found that the macroscopic
stress responses calculated under representative macroscopic strain paths (stretching along the longitudinal
and transversal directions, and shearing) of all samples above 20 20 mm2 were practically indistinguishable.
This fact indicates that any subvolume of 20 20 mm2 (or greater) can be considered as a Representative Vol-
ume Element (RVE) of the porous material under study.
   The ﬁnite element discretization corresponding to the particular 20 20 mm2 RVE employed in the ensu-
ing simulations is shown in Fig. 3(a). The number of (four-node bilinear) elements is ne ¼ 9746, and the num-
ber of nodes n ¼ 11825. The employed quadrature formula, on the other hand, is the standard 2 2 Gauss
rule, the total number of Gauss points amounting thus to ng ¼ 4 ne ¼ 38984. To overcome incompressibility
issues while maintaining the displacement-based formulation presented in the preceding sections, the com-
monly known as “B-bar” approach is adopted.20 The constitutive diﬀerential equations are integrated in time
using the classical (fully implicit) backward-Euler scheme.

9.3. Sampling of parameter space

   The ﬁrst step in the process of constructing the reduced basis is the sampling of the input parameter space; we
saw in Section 3.1 that, in the ﬁne-scale BVP, this process amounts to select representative macroscopic strain
histories. The three macroscopic strain histories ðnhst ¼ 3Þ used in the case under study are depicted in Fig. 4.
In each of these strain trajectories, one of the (independent) strain components follows a linear ascending path
while the magnitude of the other two components is set to zero. The time domain for each strain history is
discretized into nstp ¼ 50 equally spaced steps, resulting in a total number of nsnp ¼ nhst  nstp ¼ 150 snapshots.
Remark 9.1. The task of sampling the input parameter space is somehow akin to the experimental process
whereby material parameters of standard phenomenological models are calibrated in a laboratory. In this
analogy, the RVE plays the role of the corresponding experimental specimen, whereas the macro-strain


20
   This means that, in this case, the reduced “B-matrix” B  ðxÞ appearing in the formulation of the HP-ROM is not constructed using the
gradients of the shape functions, as indicated by Eq. (23), but rather using the modiﬁed “B-matrix” emanating from the three-ﬁeld Hu–
Washizu variational principle [60].
174                        J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189




                                                                          1
                                                                        0.9
                                                                        0.8
                                                                        0.7
                                                                        0.6
                                                                        0.5
                                                                        0.4
                                                                        0.3
                                                                        0.2
                                                                        0.1
                                                                          0
                                                                            0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1   1.2   1.4   1.6   1.8




Fig. 3. (a) Finite element mesh of the RVE corresponding to the porous metal material. (b) Cumulative probability distribution followed
by the length of the pore major axes.




                     Fig. 4. Macro-strain trajectories used for generating the displacement and stress snapshots.


training trajectories represent the loading paths of the pertinent calibration tests. Hindsight and elementary
physical considerations can therefore aid in restricting the number of strain histories (and hence of snapshots)
necessary to characterize the response. For instance, if the behavior of the materials that compose the RVE is
governed by rate-independent constitutive models (as in the case at hand), we know beforehand that it is not
necessary to study the response under varying rates of deformation.
   Strategies for eﬃciently sampling the input parameter space in general model reduction contexts can be
found in Refs. [12,13,15,42].

9.4. Dimensionality reduction: a priori error analysis

   The ﬁnite element displacement ﬂuctuation and stress ﬁelds computed at each time step of the input strain tra-
jectories shown above are multiplied by their corresponding weighting matrices (M    and W 1=2 ) and stored, in the
snapshot matrices X   u 2 R nd n snp                                       n s n
                                       (n  d ¼ 11825  2 ¼ 23650) and X 2 R g snp (ng  s ¼ 38984  4 ¼ 155936),
respectively. Then, these matrices are subjected to the SVD-based, elastic/inelastic dimensionality reduction pro-
cess sketched in Section 3.2.1 — and described more in detail in Appendix B — in order to generate an optimal set
of basis vectors for both the displacements ﬂuctuation and stress solution spaces.
                              J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                                175


   To elucidate which of these basis vectors constitute the “essential” modes of the response, we plot in Fig. 5
the dimensionless POD truncation error estimates deﬁned, for the displacement ﬂuctuations, as:
                       u  X
                      kX      ðnu Þk
                               u       F
       ~eu ðnu Þ :¼                     ;                                                                                              ð119Þ
                          kX u kF

and for the stresses:
                        kX  X ? ðnr ÞkF
       ~etrun
         r ðnr Þ :¼                       ;                                                                                             ð120Þ
                            kXkF

X  ðnu Þ and X ? ðnr Þ being the orthogonal projection of X
                                                              u and X onto the span of the ﬁrst nu and nr basis
   u
vectors, respectively. It can be observed in Fig. 5 that both error measures decrease monotonically with
increasing order of truncation — this is a mere consequence of the optimality properties of the SVD —
and at approximately the same rate; the decay is more pronounced from 1 to 6 modes, and becomes more
gradual thereafter, tending asymptotically to zero as the number of modes increases. The truncation error
for both stresses and displacement ﬂuctuations at nr ¼ nu ¼ 6 is around 5%. In terms of dimensionality reduc-
tion, this means that the data contained in the snapshot matrices can be “compressed” to a factor of
ðnu =nsnp Þ  100 ¼ ð6=150Þ  100 ¼ 4% and still retain 95% of the information — the essential information.
The ﬁrst 6 basis functions (3 elastic and 3 inelastic) for both stresses and displacement ﬂuctuations, therefore,
are to be regarded as essential modes in the characterization of the mechanical response of the concerned
RVE. By way of illustration, we plot in Fig. 6 the contour plots of the euclidean norm of such 6 essential dis-
placement ﬂuctuations modes (kUi k; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . 6).


9.5. Sampling points

9.5.1. Basic sampling points
    Once the stress and displacement ﬂuctuation basis vectors have been determined, the next oﬄine step con-
sists in the selection — among the full set of ﬁnite element Gauss points — of an optimal set of sampling points.
Following the strategy described in Section 7.2, we carry out such a selection by ﬁrst computing the location of
what we have called basic sampling points fxI r ð1Þ ; xI r ð2Þ . . . xI r ðpr Þ g. To assess the eﬃciency of the employed
Hierarchical Interpolation Points Method, abbreviated HIPM, we plot in Fig. 7 the estimates for both the
POD truncation (shown previously in Fig. 5) and total stress error versus the number of stress modes nr
(in using this algorithm, it is assumed that pr ¼ nr ). The total stress error estimate is deﬁned as




Fig. 5. POD truncation error estimates ~eu (for the displacement ﬂuctuations, see Eq. (119)) and ~etrun
                                                                                                   r    (for the stresses, see Eq. (120)) versus
number of basis vectors employed in the approximation (nu and nr , respectively). The portion between 6 and 11 modes is shown in
magniﬁed form.
176                             J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189




Fig. 6. Contour plots of the euclidean norm of the ﬁrst 6 displacement ﬂuctuations modes (kUi k; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . 5). Deformed shapes are
scaled up by a factor of 15.




Fig. 7. Estimates for the POD truncation (~etrun
                                             r , see Eq. (120)) and total (~
                                                                           er , see Eq. (121)) stress error versus number of basis vectors
employed in the approximation (nr ). The total error estimate is computed using only the set of basic sampling points (~er ¼ ~er ðnr ; I r Þ, with
pr ¼ nr ). The portion between 6 and 11 modes is shown in magniﬁed form.

                            kX  X  ðnr ; I r ÞkF
       ~er ðnr ; I r Þ :¼                                                                                                                 ð121Þ
                                 kXkF
where X  ðnr ; I r Þ denotes the oblique projection (calculated using sampling points I r ) of X onto the span of the
ﬁrst nr basis vectors (W1 ; W2 . . . Wnr ). It can be appreciated in Fig. 7 that both the total error and the truncation
error curves are practically coincident, a fact that indicates that the contribution of the reconstruction error:
              qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                     kX ? ðnr Þ  X  ðnr ; I r ÞkF
      ~erec
        r   ¼    ~
                 e 2 ~
                   r     e trun 2 ¼
                           r                                                                                       ð122Þ
                                                 kXkF
                       J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189            177


(the error introduced as a result of using only pr sampling points instead of the entire set of ﬁnite element
Gauss points, see Section 7.1.1) is negligible in comparison to the discrepancies due to truncation of the POD
basis. For nr ¼ pr ¼ 6, for instance, the reconstruction error is less than 3% of the total stress error. In view
of these results, it becomes clear that further reﬁnements in the algorithm for selecting the basic sampling points
are in principle not necessary: the employed HIPM optimization algorithm, however heuristic, satisfactorily ful-
ﬁlls this purpose. If one wishes to lower the stress approximation error, it is far more eﬀective to simply increase
the level of truncation.

9.5.2. Stabilizing sampling points
    Concerning what we have termed “stabilizing sampling points”, Fig. 8(a) contains the graphs, for varying
levels of truncation, of factor fF deﬁned in Eq. (100) as a function of the number of stabilizing sampling points
pB . To study the inﬂuence of including such points on the spectral properties — positive deﬁniteness — of the
stiﬀness matrix, these graphs are accompanied, see Fig. 8(b), by the plots of the minimum eigenvalue lKmin (over
all time steps and iterations for each case) of the symmetric part of the reduced-order Jacobian matrix K  ver-
sus pB . It can be seen that fF decreases monotonically as the number of stabilizing sampling points increases,
and such a decrease is reﬂected, as theoretically anticipated in Section 6.4.1, in the improvement of the spectral
properties of the reduced-order Jacobian matrix (higher lKmin as pB raises). For clarity, the minimum number of
stabilizing sampling points required, for each level of truncation, to render positive deﬁnite K  is plotted in
Fig. 9. From this plot, it can be gleaned that, roughly, the higher the level of truncation (and thus the number
of basic sampling points), the more stabilizing sampling points appear to be needed to ensure the positive def-
initeness of K  . For nr ¼ pr ¼ 6, adding just one stabilizing sampling points suﬃces, while for nr ¼ pr ¼ 11, 7
points are required.
Observation 9.1. The values shown in Fig. 9 correspond to the minimum pB that leads to positive deﬁnite K 
when the prescribed strain path coincides with any of the “training” strain trajectory (displayed in Fig. 4).
Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that the Jacobian matrix will also exhibit this desirable property for
prescribed strain histories diﬀerent from the training ones. Thus, in view of such uncertainty, and in the
interest of robustness, it is preferable to stay on the side of “caution” in this regard and use more stabilizing
sampling points that the minimum number indicated by the analysis based on the training strain trajectories. It
is the authors’ experience that a “safe” estimate for pB is to simply take pB ¼ pr — that is, equal number of
basic and stabilizing sampling points. In adopting such a rule, the authors have not observed any convergence
failures whatsoever, neither in the example under consideration nor in other cases not shown here.

  The location of the ﬁrst pr ¼ 6 basic sampling points and the corresponding pB ¼ 6 stabilizing sampling
points is depicted in Fig. 10.

9.6. A posteriori errors: consistency analysis

   The error measures displayed previously in Figs. 5 and 7 only depend on the outcome of the SVD of the
snapshot matrices; they can be calculated, thus, before actually constructing the reduced-order model. Error
analyses based on such measures serve the useful purpose of providing a ﬁrst hint of how many stress and
displacement ﬂuctuations modes are needed to satisfactorily replicate the full-order, ﬁnite element solution,
and thereby, of prospectively evaluating the viability of the reduced basis approach itself.
   However, these a priori error estimates do not tell the whole story. Expression (121) for the stress approx-
imation error presumes that the stress solution at the chosen sampling points is the one provided by the ﬁnite
element model, thus ignoring the fact that, actually, in the reduced-order model, and for the general case of
nonlinear, dissipative materials, the stress information at such points at a given time step is already polluted by
truncation (in displacement ﬂuctuations and stresses) and reconstruction (in stresses) errors originated in pre-
vious time steps. To quantify the extent to which this amalgam of accumulated errors aﬀects the predictions
furnished by the HP-ROM, it is necessary to perform a consistency analysis.
   Generally speaking, a reduced basis approximation is said to be consistent if, in the limit of no truncation, it
introduces no additional error in the solution of the same problem for which the data used in constructing the
178                         J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189




Fig. 8. (a) Factor fF (deﬁned in Eq. (99)) versus number of stabilizing sampling points pB for varying numbers of basic sampling points pr
(with pr ¼ nr ¼ nu ). (b) Minimum eigenvalue lKmin (over all time steps and iterations for each pr ) of the symmetric part of the reduced-order
Jacobian matrix K  versus number of stabilizing sampling points pB .




Fig. 9. Minimum number of stabilizing sampling points required to make the Jacobian matrix K  deﬁnite positive for each level of
truncation nr ¼ nu ¼ pr (deduced from Fig. 8).



basis functions were acquired [14]. In the BVP under consideration, thus, consistency implies that, when using
as input macro-strain paths the same trajectories employed in the “training” process, results obtained with the
HP-ROM should converge, as nr and nu increase, to the solution furnished by the full-order, ﬁnite element
model. This condition can be checked by studying the evolution of the error measures deﬁned as
                            J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                          179




Fig. 10. Location within the RVE of the ﬁnite elements (marked in red) that contains the ﬁrst pr ¼ pB ¼ 6 basic and stabilizing sampling
points. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

                                 u  X
                                kX     ROM ðnu ; nr ; I Þk
      ~eROM
        u   ðnu ; nr ; I Þ :¼           u
                                           uk
                                                             F
                                                                                                                                 ð123Þ
                                         kX    F

for the displacement ﬂuctuations, and
                                  kX  X ROM ðnu ; nr ; I r ÞkF
      ~eROM
        r   ðnu ; nr ; I r Þ :¼                                                                                                  ð124Þ
                                           kXkF
for the stresses. (The superscript “ROM” is appended to highlight that, unlike X           and X  in Eqs. (119) and
                                                                                           u
        
(121), X uROM
               and X ROM
                          are matrices of displacement ﬂuctuation and stress snapshots computed using the HP-
ROM). Fig. 11(a) and (b) contain the graphs of these a posteriori error measures, along with their respective a
priori counterparts ~eu (Eq. (119)) and ~er (Eq. (121)), versus the level of truncation. It becomes clear from these
graphs that consistency, in the sense given above, is observed in terms of both displacement ﬂuctuations and
stresses: the a posteriori error measures ~eROMu    and ~eROM
                                                          r   mimic essentially the decreasing tendency of their a
priori counterparts ~eu and ~er , respectively. It can be seen also that the a priori error estimations ~eu and ~er con-
stitute (rather tight) lower bounds for their a posteriori counterparts ~eROM
                                                                            u    and ~eROM
                                                                                       r     , respectively. This can be
                                                                     ROM
better appreciated, for the stresses, in Fig. 12, where the ratio ~er =~er versus the level of truncation is plotted.
    The degree of approximation that can be achieved using the proposed HP-ROM is quantiﬁed in a more
“engineering” fashion in Fig. 13, where we plot, for the case of the ﬁrst training strain history (stretching
in the longitudinal direction), the longitudinal, macroscopic stress–strain curves computed using the FE model,
on the one hand, and the HP-ROM with nu ¼ nr ¼ 6; 7; 8 modes, on the other hand. Observe that the max-
imum deviation from the FE response when using 6 modes (3 elastic and 3 inelastic) takes place at the onset of
plastic yielding and is below 8%; remarkably, as deformation continues, this deviation gradually diminishes,
being practically negligible at the end of the process. Furthermore, by just increasing the order of truncation to
nr ¼ nu ¼ 8, diﬀerences between the HP-ROM and the FEM responses become virtually imperceptible at all
levels of deformation. Resemblance between HP-ROM and FEM results can also be appreciated in terms of
stress distribution in the contour plots shown in Fig. 14. Visually, there are no discernible diﬀerences between
the two contour plots.

9.7. “Training” errors

   The studies presented in the preceding subsections were aimed at examining the errors incurred in approx-
                                                                        
imating the snapshot solution space V snp                                     snp
                                      u by the reduced-order subspace V u 2 V u spanned by the POD basis
                                                                         
vectors — in the terminology of Section 3.1 — and to check that when V u ! V snpu , the solution provided by
180                         J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189




                                          (a)                                                     (b)

Fig. 11. Comparison of the evolution of a priori and a posteriori error measures versus the level of truncation (using nu ¼ nr ¼ pr ¼ pB ).
(a) Displacement ﬂuctuations (see Eqs. (119) and (123)). (b) Stresses (see Eqs. (121) and (124)).




Fig. 12. Ratio ~eROM
                 r   =~er between the a posteriori and a priori measures for the stress approximation error against the level of truncation
(using nu ¼ nr ¼ pr ¼ pB ).

the HP-ROM converges to that obtained with the FEM. But recall that the snapshot space V snp       u is but a (pre-
sumably representative) subspace of V u , the manifold of V hu induced by the parametric dependence of the ﬁne-
scale BVP on the prescribed macroscopic strain history. Consequently, in general — for an arbitrary input
strain trajectory — the HP-ROM solution will not converge to the solution provided by the FEM. To com-
plete the error assessment analysis, thus, it is necessary to estimate also the errors inherent to the sampling of
the parameter space — we call them training errors — and judge whether the selected training strain trajecto-
ries generate a snapshot subspace that is indeed representative of such a solution space21 V u .
   Ideally, one should carry out this error assessment by picking up, guided by some sound, statistically-based
procedure, a suﬃciently large set of strain paths and by comparing the solutions computed by the FEM and
HP-ROM under such input strain paths for varying levels of truncation. Such a degree of rigor, however, is
beyond the scope of the present work. Here, we limit ourselves here to analyze the quality of the HP-ROM
approximation obtained for two diﬀerent input strain histories, namely, a uniaxial compression test, and a
biaxial loading/unloading test.

9.7.1. Uniaxial compression
   The ﬁrst strain path employed for the assessment is displayed in Fig. 15(a); it represents a monotonic com-
pression in the transversal direction (the model, see Fig. 4, was trained using only stretching and shear, but not

 21
    To put it in less mathematical terms — by appealing to the analogy, introduced in Remark 9.1, between the training of the RVE
reduced-order model and the calibration of standard phenomenological models — we have “calibrated” our HP-ROM using the training
tests displayed previously in Fig. 4, and we have shown that the model is able to exactly replicate the behavior of the RVE in these tests
when nu ¼ nr is suﬃciently large. Similarly to the situation encountered when dealing with standard phenomenological models, it remains
now to assess the capability of the proposed HP-ROM to predict the behavior of the RVE under conditions diﬀerent from those used in
the “calibration” (training) process.
                            J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                             181




Fig. 13. Longitudinal macroscopic stress versus longitudinal macroscopic strain computed using FEM and HP-ROM with
nr ¼ nu ¼ 6; 7; 8.




Fig. 14. Contour plot of transversal stresses computed at the end of the ﬁrst “training” strain history using (a) FEM (b) HP-ROM with
nr ¼ nu ¼ 6. Deformed shapes are exaggerated (by a factor of 20).


compression, tests). For purposes of evaluating the quality of the HP-ROM approximation, it is convenient to
introduce the following macroscopic22 stress error estimate:
              vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
              uPntstp
              u          kri  ri;ROM ðnr ; nu ; I Þk2
      Er;M :¼ t i¼1 M Pnt M
      ~ ROM
                                                                              ;                       ð125Þ
                                         stp     i     2
                                       i¼1 krM k


where riM and ri;ROM
                 M     denote the macroscopic stress at the ith time step computed by the FEM and the HP-
ROM, respectively. This error estimate is plotted in Fig. 15(b) versus the level of truncation nu ¼ nr . Observe
that the error goes to zero as the number of employed modes increase. In this particular case, thus, there is no
additional error due to sampling of the parameter space.

22
   Recall that the output of interest in solving the ﬁne-scale BVP is the macroscopic stress tensor; thus, the error estimate deﬁned in Eq.
            
(125) E~ ROM
         r;M   provides a more meaningful indication of the quality of the approximation than the stress error measure deﬁned previously
in Eq. (124) ~eROM
               r   . The latter is more suited for examining convergence properties of the HP-ROM approximation, since the
minimization problem that underlies the SVD is posed in terms of the Frobenius norm.
182                         J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189




                                                                                                                         ~ ROM (see Eq. (125))
Fig. 15. (a) First strain trajectory employed for assessing training errors. (b) Plot of the macroscopic error estimator E r;M
corresponding to this testing trajectory versus level of truncation (nr ¼ nu ).




                                 Fig. 16. Second strain trajectory employed for assessing training errors.



Remark 9.2. This simple example ﬁttingly illustrates one of the acclaimed advantages of POD/Galerkin
reduced-order approaches over “black box” methods such as artiﬁcial neural networks — that are also based
on the partitioned oﬄine-onlinecomputational paradigm — POD/Galerkin reduced-order approaches
preserve the “physics” of the problem one wishes to model and, as a consequence, are able to make
physically-based extrapolations. For instance, in this case, the reduced-order model is able to exactly replicate
(for suﬃciently large nu ¼ nr Þ the macroscopic compressive behavior of the RVE, even though no information
regarding this deformational state has been supplied to the model in the calibration (training) phase; the HP-
ROM is “aware”, ﬁguratively speaking, that the matrix material in the RVE exhibits similar behavior in
tension and compression (J2 plasticity).


9.7.2. Biaxil loading/unloading test
   A more severe test for assessing errors associated to the training process is provided by the strain trajectory
shown in Fig. 16. Indeed, while the training strain histories of Fig. 4 only included monotonic, uniaxial
stretching, the strain history displayed in Fig. 16 consists of a cycle of biaxial, loading/unloading stretching
(time steps 1 to 100) and biaxial loading/unloading compression (time steps 101 to 200). The graph of the mac-
roscopic error estimator (125) corresponding to this input strain path as a function of the level of truncation is
represented in Fig. 17(a). It can be readily perceived that, in this case, and in contrast to the situation encoun-
tered in the previously discussed input strain trajectory, the macroscopic stress does not go to zero as the
                             J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                                    183




                                                                           (a)




                                                                           (b)

Fig. 17. (a) Macroscopic error estimator E  ~ ROM
                                              r;M (see Eq. (125)) versus level of truncation (nr ¼ nu ) for the case of testing trajectory shown in
Fig. 16. (b) Local speedup factor S loc (deﬁned in Eq. (126)) reported for this case versus level of truncation. This plot is accompanied by the
graph of the ratio ng =p, where ng ¼ 38984 is the total number of Gauss points of the ﬁnite element mesh, and p ¼ 2nr the number of
sampling points employed for numerically integrating the HP-ROM.


number of POD modes included in the basis increases. Rather, the graph drops sharply from 24% to approx-
imately 5% at nr ¼ nu ¼ 5 (second inelastic mode), and then ﬂuctuates erratically, with no apparent trend,
between 3% and 10% — a level of accuracy that, nevertheless, may be deemed more than acceptable in most
practical applications. A more clear picture of the accuracy of the approximation for the particular case of
nr ¼ nu ¼ 6 can be obtained from the stress–strain diagrams shown in Fig. 18.

9.8. Speedup analysis
   Lastly, we turn our attention to one of the main concerns of the present work: the issue of computational
eﬃciency. For a given error level, how many times can the proposed HP-ROM speed up the calculation of the
RVE response with respect to the reference ﬁnite element model? Let us deﬁne the local speedup factor as the
ratio
                  tFE ðn; ng Þ
      S loc :¼                    ;                                                                    ð126Þ
               tROM ðnr ; nu ; pÞ
where tFE and tROM denote the CPU times required to compute the FE and HP-ROM macro-stress responses,
respectively, induced by a given input strain history23 In Fig. 17(b), we show the graph of the speedup factor
reported in the case of the input strain path of Fig. 16 as a function of the number of POD modes included in

 23
    The computational cost associated to the oﬄine stage — generation of snapshots plus the comparatively negligible expenses of
applying the POD and selecting the sampling points — has been deliberately ruled out from this speedup analysis because, in two-scale
homogenization contexts, the RVE equilibrium problem is to be solved a sheer number of times and, consequently, this overhead cost is
quickly amortized.
184                       J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189




Fig. 18. Longitudinal and transversal macroscopic stress versus longitudinal macroscopic strain computed using the FEM and the HP-
ROM with nr ¼ nu ¼ 6 (for the case of the testing trajectory shown in Fig. 16).

the analysis (recall in this respect that nu ¼ nr ¼ p=2). We plot also in Fig. 17(b) the ratio ng =p, i.e., the relation
between the total number of integration points in the ﬁnite element model (ng ¼ 38984) and in the reduced
order model ðpÞ. It can be gleaned from Fig. 17(b) that the reported speedup factors are of the same order
of magnitude as the ratio ng =p; i.e.:
             ng     ng
       S loc    ¼      ;                                                                                           ð127Þ
              p    2nr
(this indicates that the evaluation of the stresses at the integration points dominates the total computational
cost). Although these results are no doubt inﬂuenced and biased by the particular programming language and
coding style employed — we use an in-house, non-vectorized Matlab program operating in a Linux platform
— and, consequently, this trend may not be exactly observed when using other programming languages and/
or platforms, they serve to provide an idea of the tremendous gains in performance that can be achieved using
the proposed ROM; for nr ¼ p ¼ 6 modes, for instance, the computational cost is reduced by a factor above
3600, while still capturing 95% of the full-order, high-ﬁdelity information — the essential information.

10. Concluding remarks

   One of the most striking features of the proposed reduced-order model is perhaps the conceptual simplicity
of the RVE equilibrium equation in its hyperreduced-order form: the sum of (reduced) internal forces at the
pre-selected sampling points must give identical result either calculated using observed stresses or ﬁtted stres-
ses. Although this condition appears, in hindsight, rather reasonable, even obvious — it ensures maximum
resemblance between reduced-order and full-order responses at the sampling points — it seems diﬃcult to
arrive at it without the beneﬁt of the integration procedure — based on the notion of expanded approximation
space — advocated in the present paper.
   The hyperreduced form of the RVE equilibrium equation excels not only in its conceptual simplicity; the
corresponding solution scheme is also very simple to implement. Taking as departure point an existing FE
code, one only has to replace the typical loop over elements in the FE code by a loop over the pre-selected
sampling points fxI 1 ; xI 2 ; . . . xI p g. The stress vectors and corresponding constitutive tangent matrices obtained
at each stage of the loop are stored in the gappy weighted vector R             ^ and the matrix C,   ^ respectively, and, then
the residual vector and the Jacobian matrix are computed as B           ^  T R     ^  T C
                                                                               ^ and B      ^ B
                                                                                              ^  , respectively. Notice that no
assembly process is needed, nor has one to worry about imposing boundary conditions. Once convergence is
achieved, the macroscopic stress value is simply calculated as rM ¼ TR.             ^ It should be emphasized again that
the operation count in both solving this hyperreduced RVE equation and updating the macroscopic stress vector
depends exclusively on the reduced dimensions nu and p (number of ﬂuctuation modes and number of sampling
                            J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                           185


points, respectively). Likewise, storage of history data (internal variables) is only required at the pre-selected
sampling points. Computational savings accrue, thus, not only in terms of number of operations, but also
in terms of memory requirements.
   The success of the proposed homogenization strategy is predicated on the assumption that displacement
and stress ﬁelds induced by the parametric dependence on the input macroscopic strain can be approximated
by (relatively) low-dimensional functions. Numerical results shown in the preceding section seem to suggest
that, in general, this assumption may be expected to hold in the case of materials governed by strain hardening
laws in the small strain regime — regardless of the geometrical complexity, number and distribution of heter-
ogeneities within the RVE. However, it is by no means apparent that this conclusion can be easily extended to
more (kinematically and phenomenologically) complex scenarios, involving large deformations, strain locali-
zation, decohesion, etc. For instance, can the deformational behavior of an RVE aﬀected by multiple propa-
gating cracks be represented also in a parsimonious manner, as in the case of strain hardening? Or will the
number of modes necessary to accurately replicate its response combinatorially increase with the number
of potential crack paths (i.e., with the geometrical complexity of the RVE)? Undoubtedly, in these complex,
nonlinear scenarios, the task of sampling the parameter space — i.e., of choosing the macro-strain histories at
which to obtain the snapshots — will become quite complicated, due to the richness of possible deformational
patterns (void closure, propagating discontinuities . . .), and thus diﬃcult to carry out on intuitive basis (as it
has been done in the present paper). Therefore, it would be desirable to systematize this crucial task, as well as
to provide some statistical means to certify, so to speak, the representativeness of the chosen snapshots. Like-
wise, topological variations caused by these phenomena may render POD-based compression algorithms inap-
propriate for collapsing the dimensions of the snapshots space; in such cases, nonlinear dimensionality
reduction methods such as the Isomap algorithm [43] may be more suitable. Research in these fronts is
currently in progress and will be reported in forthcoming publications.

Acknowledgements

   The research leading to these results has received funding from, on the one hand, the European Research
Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ ERC Grant Agree-
ment n. 320815, Advanced Grant Project COMP-DES-MAT, and, on the other hand, the Spanish Ministry
of Science and Innovation under grant BIA2011-24258.

Appendix A. Proper Orthogonal Decomposition

   The formal statement of the POD problem goes as follows: given the ensemble of snapshots
fu1 ; u2 ; . . . unsnp g, ﬁnd a set of nu < nsnp orthogonal basis functions fU1 ; U2 ; . . . Unu g Ui 2 V snp
                                                                                                          u   such that the
error deﬁned as
                        vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                        u nsnp
                        uX
       eu ðnu Þ :¼ t kuk  P uk kL2 ðXÞ
                                                        2
                                                                                                                     ð128Þ
                      k¼1


is minimized. Here, P uk represents the projection of uk onto the subspace spanned by the basis functions
     nu
fUi gi¼1 , and k  kL2 ðXÞ symbolizes the L2 norm. We shall denote by Ui ði ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu Þ the column vector con-
taining the values of basis function Ui at the nodes of the underlying ﬁnite element mesh. Likewise, the matrix
formed by such vectors, U ¼ ½ U1 U2     2 Rnd nu , will be hereafter called the reduced basis matrix.
   The reduced basis matrix U can be computed from the snapshot matrix X u by means of the Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) as follows (see Ref. [16] for more details). We ﬁrst deﬁne the matrix24
               Z
      MIJ :¼       N I ðxÞN J ðxÞ dX I; J ¼ 1; 2 . . . n:                                                      ð129Þ
                  X


 24
    Note that, except for the density factor, this matrix M is similar to the “mass matrix” appearing in ﬁnite element implementations of
dynamical problems. For implementational purposes, one can simply use a lumped version of such a matrix.
186                        J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189

         TM
Let M ¼ M   be the Cholesky decomposition of M, and let X
                                                          u denote the matrix deﬁned as:
       u :¼ MX
      X       u:                                                                                              ð130Þ
                                          u , that is, the factorization
Then, we compute the reduced SVD [37] of X
      u ¼ U
      X    SV
              T;                                                                                              ð131Þ
where V 2 Rnsnp r (r is the rank of X
                                      u ) and U
                                                2 Rnd r stand for the matrices of right and left singular vectors,
                         r r
respectively; and S 2 R is a diagonal matrix containing the singular values of X u . The ith column of the re-
duced basis matrix U is ﬁnally related to the ith left singular vector of X u through expression
            1 U
      Ui ¼ M     i;       i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu :                                                                 ð132Þ


Appendix B. Elastic/inelastic reduced basis matrix

   This appendix is devoted to provide further details concerning the actual numerical implementation of the
elastic/inelastic partitioned strategy, presented in Section 3.2.1, for the computation of the reduced basis matri-
ces U (displacement ﬂuctuations). The steps to arrive at the desired matrix basis U are summarized in the
following.

1. Compute ﬁnite element stress solutions for representative, input macro-strain histories.
2. Store the displacement ﬂuctuation solutions computed at each time step of these macro-strain trajectories in
   the displacement ﬂuctuations snapshot matrix X u 2 Rnd nsnp :
                                
      X u ¼ U 1 U 2    U nsnp                                                                         ð133Þ

3. Pick up from X u a minimum of me (me ¼ 6 for 3D problems, and me ¼ 3 for plane strain) linearly indepen-
   dent columns corresponding to purely elastic solutions. Store these columns in a matrix Z el
                                                                                             u .
4. Perform the reduced Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the matrix deﬁned as
       el :¼ MZ
      Z        el                                                                                             ð134Þ
        u        u

  where M is the matrix of the Cholesky factorization of M (M ¼ M
                                                                  T M).
                                                                      A basis matrix for RangeðZ el Þ is
                                                                                                  u
  ﬁnally obtained as
              1 D
      Del :¼ M     el                                                                                         ð135Þ
    el 2 Rnd me being the matrix of left singular vectors arising from the SVD of Z
   D                                                                                   el . In principle, Del may be
                                                                                        u
                                               el              el
   used as the desired elastic basis matrix U . However, D does not enjoy any optimality property with re-
   spect to X u — it is only optimal with respect to the matrix Z el  u of chosen elastic snapshots.
5. For consistency in the approximation, thus, it is preferable to derive Uel from the “elastic component” of
   X u — the orthogonal projection of X u onto RangeðDel Þ — the expression for this projection reads:
                       T
      X el   el el
        u ¼ D ðD MX u Þ:                                                                                       ð136Þ
  The elastic basis matrix can be ﬁnally calculated from X el
                                                           u as:

              1 U
      Uel :¼ M     el ;                                                                                       ð137Þ
   where U                                                                              el :¼ MX
           el is the matrix of left singular vectors emerging from the reduced SVD of X        el ; i.e.,
                                                                                         u        u
    el   el  el  el T
   X u ¼ U Su V u .
6. Calculate the “inelastic component” X inu of the snapshot matrix X u as:

      X in        el
        u ¼ Xu  Xu ;                                                                                          ð138Þ
  that is, X in
             u is the orthogonal projection of X u onto the orthogonal complement, in RangeðX u Þ, of
  > RangeðUel Þ.
                               J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189     187


7. It is now on this inelastic snapshot matrix X in
                                                 u that we apply the POD in order to identify and unveil the
   essential or most “energetic” inelastic ﬂuctuation modes. This is done by ﬁrst carrying out the reduced
   SVD of X   in ¼ MX
                     in :
               u       u

        in ¼ D
       X       in S     in T :
                    in V                                                                                       ð139Þ
         u           u    u

   The ith POD basis vector of X in
                                 u is then given by:

       Uin   1  in
        i ¼ M Di ;                 i ¼ 1; 2 . . . nu  me :                                                     ð140Þ
                                                  nd nu
8. The desired basis matrix U 2 R                     adopts ﬁnally the form:
                      2                                                                   3
                              Elastic modes             Essential inelastic modes
                        zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
                      6                                                                   7
     U ¼ ½Uel Uin  ¼ 4Uel         el              el     in
                           1 U2 . . . Ume U1 U2 . . . Unu me 5
                                                                  in             in
                                                                                                                ð141Þ



Appendix C. Block matrix pseudoinverse of the expanded basis matrix

   The inverse of a 2 2 symmetric block matrix is given by the following expression (see, for instance, Ref. [11]):
                     1 " 1                                     #
        1      A B         A þ A1 BS1 BT A1 A1 BS1
     M ¼                  ¼                                                                                 ð142Þ
               BT C               S1 BT A1             S1
where
       S ¼ C  BT A1 B                                                                                         ð143Þ
is the so-called Schur complement of A in M. This formula can be used to derive closed-form expressions for
the modal coeﬃcients cad and cin (see Section 6.2). The departure point is Eq. (67):
        ad                 "                #1 "      #
         c                     ^TW
                               W    ^ W
                                      ^TB  ^       ^T
                                                    W
                  ^ ^  y^                                 ^                                         ð144Þ
              ¼ ð½W B Þ R ¼                               R;
         cin                   B    ^ B
                               ^ T W ^ T B
                                           ^       ^ T
                                                    B
                     y
        ^ B
where ð½W ^  Þ designates the pseudo-inverse of the gappy expanded basis matrix. By setting:
         ^ T W;
       A¼W   ^              ^ TB
                          B¼W  ^ ;              ^ T B
                                               C¼B    ^                                                        ð145Þ
and by inserting Eq. (142) into Eq. (144), one obtains upon expansion:
                                              T
                          ^T þ B
       cin ¼ S1 ðBT A1 W    ^  ÞR
                                    ^                                                                           ð146Þ
and
                                                                           T
                                                                                
       cad ¼                              ^ T  A1 BS1 B
                    A1 þ A1 BS1 BT A1 W              ^                      R^

                                                           cin
                           zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
                                                                     
               1 ^ T ^
            ¼ A W R þ A B S1 BT A1 W
                        1                          ^T þ B     ^ T R            ^ TR
                                                                         ^ ¼ A1 W  ^ þ A1 Bcin :              ð147Þ
By substituting back Eq. (145) into the above equation, and taking into account that:
       ^ y ¼ ðW
       W          ^ 1 W
              ^ T WÞ   ^T                                                                                       ð148Þ
one ﬁnally gets:
       cad ¼ W^ y ðR
                   ^ B  ^  cin Þ;                                                                             ð149Þ
                                     
       cin ¼ S1 B ^ T I  W  ^W  ^ y R;
                                        ^                                                                       ð150Þ

where
         ^ T ðI  W
       S¼B         ^W^ y ÞB
                          ^ :                                                                                  ð151Þ
188                         J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189


References

 [1] A. Abdulle, Y. Bai, Adaptive reduced basis ﬁnite element heterogeneous multiscale method, Comput. Methods Appl. M. 257 (2013)
     203–220.
 [2] A. Abdulle, Y. Bai, Reduced basis ﬁnite element heterogeneous multiscale method for high-order discretizations of elliptic
     homogenization problems, J. Comput. Phys. 231 (21) (2012) 7014–7036.
 [3] S. An, T. Kim, D. James, Optimizing cubature for eﬃcient integration of subspace deformations, ACM Trans. Graph. 27 (5) (2009)
     165.
 [4] M. Ashby, Physical modelling of materials problems, Mater. Sci. Technol. 8 (2) (1992) 102–111.
 [5] P. Astrid, Reduction of process simulation models: a proper orthogonal decomposition approach, Technische Universiteit
     Eindhoven, 2004.
 [6] P. Astrid, S. Weiland, K. Willcox, T. Backx, Missing point estimation in models described by proper orthogonal decomposition,
     IEEE Trans. Automat. Control 53 (10) (2008) 2237–2251.
 [7] M. Barrault, Y. Maday, N. Nguyen, A. Patera, An empirical interpolation’method: application to eﬃcient reduced-basis
     discretization of partial diﬀerential equations, C.R. Math. 339 (9) (2004) 667–672.
 [8] C. Bishop, S.S. en ligne, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, vol. 4, springer, New York, 2006.
 [9] H. Bohm, A short introduction to basic aspects of continuum micromechanics. CDL-FMD Report 3, 1998.
[10] S. Boyaval, Reduced-basis approach for homogenization beyond the periodic setting, 2007, Arxiv preprint math/0702674.
[11] S. Boyd, L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization, Cambridge Univ Pr, 2004.
[12] T. Bui-Thanh, Model-constrained optimization methods for reduction of parameterized large-scale systems (Ph.D. thesis), Citeseer,
     2007.
[13] T. Bui-Thanh, K. Willcox, O. Ghattas, Model reduction for large-scale systems with high-dimensional parametric input space, SIAM
     J. Sci. Comput. 30 (6) (2008) 3270–3288.
[14] K. Carlberg, C. Bou-Mosleh, C. Farhat, Eﬃcient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projection and
     compressive tensor approximations, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 86 (2) (2011) 155–181.
[15] K. Carlberg, C. Farhat, A compact proper orthogonal decomposition basis for optimization-oriented reduced-order models. AIAA
     Paper 5964, 2008, pp. 10–12.
[16] K. Carlberg, C. Farhat, A low-cost, goal-oriented compact proper orthogonal decomposition basis for model reduction of static
     systems, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 86 (3) (2011) 381–402.
[17] S. Chaturantabut, D. Sorensen, Application of POD and DEIM on dimension reduction of nonlinear miscible viscous ﬁngering in
     porous media, Math. Comp. Model. Dyn. 17 (4) (2011) 337–353.
[18] S. Chaturantabut, D. Sorensen, Discrete empirical interpolation for nonlinear model reduction, in: Proceedings of the 48th IEEE
     Conference on Decision and Control, 2009 held jointly with the 2009 28th Chinese Control Conference. CDC/CCC 2009, IEEE, 2010,
     pp. 4316–4321.
[19] R. Cook, Finite Element Modeling for Stress Analysis, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1995.
[20] G. Couégnat, Approche multiéchelle du comportement mécanique de matériaux composites à renfort tissé (Ph.D. thesis), Université
     Sciences et Technologies-Bordeaux I, 2008.
[21] M. Cremonesi, D. Néron, P.-A. Guidault, P. Ladevèze, A PGD-based homogenization technique for the resolution of nonlinear
     multiscale problems, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 267 (2013) 275–292.
[22] E. de Souza Neto, R. Feijóo, Variational foundations of multi-scale constitutive models of solid: small and large strain kinematical
     formulation, LNCC Research & Development Report 16, 2006.
[23] R. DeVore, A. Iserles, E. Suli, Foundations of Computational Mathematics, Cambridge Univ Pr, 2001.
[24] A. Drago, M. Pindera, Micro-macromechanical analysis of heterogeneous materials: macroscopically homogeneous vs periodic
     microstructures, Compos. Sci. Technol. 67 (6) (2007) 1243–1263.
[25] G. Dvorak, A. Wafa, Y. Bahei-El-Din, Implementation of the transformation ﬁeld analysis for inelastic composite materials,
     Comput. Mech. 14 (3) (1994) 201–228.
[26] Y. Efendiev, J. Galvis, E. Gildin, Local–global multiscale model reduction for ﬂows in high-contrast heterogeneous media, J.
     Comput. Phys. 231 (24) (2012) 8100–8113.
[27] Y. Efendiev, J. Galvis, F. Thomines, A Systematic Coarse-Scale Model Reduction Technique for Parameter-Dependent Flows in
     Highly Heterogeneous Media and its Applications, 2012.
[28] R. Everson, L. Sirovich, Karhunen–Loeve procedure for gappy data, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 12 (8) (1995) 1657–1664.
[29] F. Feyel, J. Chaboche, Fe-2 multiscale approach for modelling the elastoviscoplastic behaviour of long ﬁbre sic/ti composite
     materials, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 183 (3) (2000) 309–330.
[30] J. Fish, K. Shek, M. Pandheeradi, M. Shephard, Computational plasticity for composite structures based on mathematical
     homogenization: theory and practice, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 148 (1–2) (1997) 53–73.
[31] D. Galbally, K. Fidkowski, K. Willcox, O. Ghattas, Non-linear model reduction for uncertainty quantiﬁcation in large-scale inverse
     problems, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 81 (12) (2010) 1581–1608.
[32] M. Geers, V. Kouznetsova, W. Brekelmans, Multi-scale computational homogenization: trends and challenges, J. Comput. Appl.
     Math. 234 (7) (2010) 2175–2182.
[33] M. Grepl, Y. Maday, N. Nguyen, A. Patera, Eﬃcient reduced-basis treatment of nonaﬃne and nonlinear partial diﬀerential
     equations, Math. Model. Numer. Anal. 41 (3) (2007) 575–605.
[34] D. Gross, T. Seelig, Fracture Mechanics: With an Introduction to Micromechanics, Springer, 2011.
                           J.A. Hernández et al. / Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189                             189


[35] J.A. Hernández, J. Oliver, A. Huespe, M. Caicedo, High-performance model reduction procedures in multiscale simulations,
     Monograph CIMNE (ISBN: 978-84-9939640-6-1), 2012, URL: <http://centrovnet.cimne.upc.edu/cvdata/cntr7/dtos/img/mdia/
     Downloads/MONOGRAFIA-PUBLICADA.pdf>.
[36] J.D. Hoﬀman, Numerical Methods for Engineers and Scientists, Marcel Dekker, 2001.
[37] L. Hogben, Handbook of Linear Algebra, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2006.
[38] Y. Hu, J. Hwang, S. Perry, Handbook of neural network signal processing, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 111 (2002) 2525.
[39] T. Kim, D. James, Skipping steps in deformable simulation with online model reduction, in: ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2009 Papers,
     ACM, 2009, pp. 1–9.
[40] V. Kouznetsova, Computational Homogenization for the Multi-Scale Analysis of Multi-Phase Materials, Technische Universiteit
     Eindhoven, 2002.
[41] P. Krysl, S. Lall, J. Marsden, Dimensional model reduction in non-linear ﬁnite element dynamics of solids and structures, Int. J.
     Numer. Methods Eng. 51 (4) (2001) 479–504.
[42] K. Kunisch, S. Volkwein, Optimal snapshot location for computing pod basis functions, ESAIM: Math. Model. Numer. Anal. 44 (3)
     (2010) 509.
[43] Z. Li, B. Wen, N. Zabaras, Computing mechanical response variability of polycrystalline microstructures through dimensionality
     reduction techniques, Comput. Mater. Sci. 49 (3) (2010) 568–581.
[44] L. Lovasz, J. Pelikan, K. Vesztergombi, Discrete Mathematics: Elementary and Beyond, Springer, 2003.
[45] J. Lubliner, Plasticity Theory, McMillan, New York, 1990.
[46] Y. Maday, A. Patera, G. Turinici, Reliable real-time solution of parametrized partial diﬀerential equations: reduced-basis output
     bound methods, J. Fluids Eng. 124 (1) (2002) 70–80.
[47] J. Michel, H. Moulinec, P. Suquet, Eﬀective properties of composite materials with periodic microstructure: a computational
     approach, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 172 (1–4) (1999) 109–143.
[48] J. Michel, P. Suquet, Nonuniform transformation ﬁeld analysis, Int. J. Solids Struct. 40 (25) (2003) 6937–6955.
[49] J. Michel, P. Suquet, Computational analysis of nonlinear composite structures using the nonuniform transformation ﬁeld analysis,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 193 (48–51) (2004) 5477–5502.
[50] E. Monteiro, J. Yvonnet, Q. He, Computational homogenization for nonlinear conduction in heterogeneous materials using model
     reduction, Comput. Mater. Sci. 42 (4) (2008) 704–712.
[51] D. Montgomery, G. Runger, Applied Statistics and Probability for Engineers, Wiley, 2010.
[52] N. Nguyen, A multiscale reduced-basis method for parametrized elliptic partial diﬀerential equations with multiple scales, J. Comput.
     Phys. 227 (23) (2008) 9807–9822.
[53] N. Nguyen, A. Patera, J. Peraire, A best points interpolation method for eﬃcient approximation of parametrized functions, Int. J.
     Numer. Methods Eng. 73 (2008) 521–543.
[54] A. Quarteroni, R. Sacco, F. Saleri, Numerical Mathematics, Springer, New York, 2000.
[55] S. Roussette, J. Michel, P. Suquet, Nonuniform transformation ﬁeld analysis of elastic-viscoplastic composites, Compos. Sci.
     Technol. 69 (1) (2009) 22–27.
[56] G. Rozza, Reduced basis methods for stokes equations in domains with non-aﬃne parameter dependence, Comput. Visual. Sci. 12 (1)
     (2009) 23–35.
[57] D. Ryckelynck, A priori hyperreduction method: an adaptive approach, J. Comput. Phys. 202 (1) (2005) 346–366.
[58] D. Ryckelynck, Hyper-reduction of mechanical models involving internal variables, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 77 (1) (2009) 75–89.
[59] D. Salomon, Data Compression: The Complete Reference, Springer-Verlag New York Incorporated, 2004.
[60] J.C. Simo, T.J.R. Hughes, Computational Inelasticity, Springer, New York, 1998.
[61] J. Yvonnet, Q. He, The reduced model multiscale method (R3M) for the non-linear homogenization of hyperelastic media at ﬁnite
     strains, J. Comput. Phys. 223 (1) (2007) 341–368.
