                                        Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
                                                   ScienceDirect

                                    Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 368 (2020) 113192
                                                                                                                  www.elsevier.com/locate/cma




            A multiscale method for periodic structures using domain
                   decomposition and ECM-hyperreduction
                                                         J.A. Hernández ∗
Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics en Enginyeria (CIMNE), Technical University of Catalonia, Edificio C1, Campus Norte, Jordi Girona
                                                          1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain
 E.S. d’Enginyeries Industrial, Aeroespacial i Audiovisual de Terrassa, Technical University of Catalonia, C/ Colom, 11, Terrassa 08222, Spain
                             Received 27 March 2020; received in revised form 1 June 2020; accepted 1 June 2020
                                                       Available online 9 June 2020



Abstract
    This paper presents a nonlinear multiscale approach for periodic structures in the quasi-static, small strain regime. The
approach consists in combining a domain decomposition method in which interface conditions are established through a
“fictitious” frame with reduced-order modeling (ROM). We propose to approximate interface displacements, subdomain
displacements and Lagrange Multipliers as linear combinations of reduced sets of dominant modes, and to assign to the
coefficients of such linear combinations the role of coarse-scale displacements, strains and stresses, respectively. We discuss and
propose a method based on subspace rotations that ensures that these three modal approximations lead to stable formulations.
The modes of such expansions are determined in an offline “training” stage by applying the truncated Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) to the solutions obtained from Finite Element (FE) analyses. In contrast to other multiscale approaches,
such as FE-ROM homogenization schemes, which uses a single unit cell with periodic conditions, here the “training” structures
are formed by several unit cells. This way, we allow the SVD to extract also dominant patterns of interaction between
subdomains in terms of reactive forces and deformations. This original feature confers to the proposed approach three unique
advantages over FE-ROM homogenization schemes, namely: (1) It can deal with unit cells of arbitrary size (no need for scale
separation). (2) It can model, not only how forces are transmitted through the structure, but also local effects. (3) It can also
handle domains which are only periodic along one or two directions (beam-like or shell structures, respectively). To deal with
material nonlinearities, element-wise Gauss integration of reduced internal forces is replaced by an algorithmically improved
version of the hyperreduction scheme recently proposed by the author elsewhere, called the Empirical Cubature Method(ECM).
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the coarse-scale Degrees of Freedom (DOFs) of a subdomain can be expressed directly in
terms of the (fine-scale) stresses and strains at the ECM integration points. This feature dispenses with the need of deploying
a special algorithmic infrastructure of intertwined local/global problems, as it occurs in FE-ROM schemes, since the unit cell
can be treated as a special type of finite element, in which the centroids of the interfaces and the ECM points play the role
of nodes and Gauss points, respectively. To illustrate all these advantages, we present 4 distinct examples: two beam-like
structures of rectangular-shape and I-shaped cross-sections, a 2D hexagonal cellular material, and a cylindrical shell made of
a porous composite cell. In all 4 cases the proposed method is able to produce coarse-scale models reducing the number of
DOFs and integration points by over two orders of magnitude, with errors below 5 %. Interestingly, in the case of the beam-like
structures, we show that the method provides 2-node beam finite elements whose kinematics are identical to that predicted



  ∗ Correspondence to: Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics en Enginyeria (CIMNE), Technical University of Catalonia, Edificio C1,
Campus Norte, Jordi Girona 1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain.
   E-mail address: jhortega@cimne.upc.edu.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2020.113192
0045-7825/⃝  c 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
2                   J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

by “analytical” beam theories (6 DOFs per node in the case of the rectangular beam), and totally consistent with their 3D
full-order counterparts.
⃝c 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


Keywords: Multiscale; Hyperreduction; Empirical Cubature Method; Machine learning; Subspace rotation; Domain decomposition




1. Introduction
   Hierarchical multiscale approaches [1] are based on the general principle of divide-and-conquer: the domain at
the highest scale is divided into smaller subdomains; then, if possible, these subdomains are further subdivided
into smaller regions, and so on until arriving at the deepest level of the hierarchy, at which no more partitioning is
possible, and recourse to experimentally derived relationships is to be made. However, this divide-and-conquer
strategy per se does not lead to any reduction in complexity — the total number of unknowns remains the
same. The actual feature that distinguishes a hierarchical multiscale model from a standard domain decomposition
problem is the introduction of simplifying assumptions in the equations governing the interaction between
contiguous subdomains at each scale. In structural problems, these simplifying assumptions translate into low-
dimensional parametrization of the deformation and force information transmitted between contiguous subdomains.
Compatibility and equilibrium equations at the immediate coarser scale are then formulated in terms of this reduced
set of force and deformation variables.

1.1. Low-dimensional parametrization of interface forces and deformations

    To illustrate this point, consider the case of first- and second-order homogenization of periodic heterogeneous
materials (see Ref. [2] for a survey on these two methods). It may be argued that first-order homogenization
represents a limiting case of two-scale method in which the subdomains (the repeating unit cells) are, loosely
speaking, so small in comparison with the characteristic length of the coarse scale that they can be regarded as
infinitesimal and, therefore, be treated as points in the classical sense of Cauchy’s continuum mechanics. This
hypothesis is often referred to as scale separation. In assuming scale separation, one accepts as axiomatic the
precepts upon which Cauchy’s theory of continuum rests, namely, that the deformation and the interface forces
on the subdomains are solely characterized by the components of the strain and stress tensors —i.e., by just 6
parameters each. In second-order homogenization theory, this scale separation condition is relaxed, and the unit
cells are considered of finite size. As a consequence, not only the stresses, but also the first moment of the stresses,
come into play in the parametrization of the interface forces. Likewise, the gradient of the strain tensor is required
in the description of boundary deformations. Classical beam theory, applied to prismatic beams of constant cross-
section, can be also viewed as a two-scale hierarchical model — the repeating unit cells in this case are “slices” of
infinitesimal width. Simplifications such as the assumption that the faces of the slices remain plane after deformation
allow one to parametrize the displacement of such faces in terms of 6 variables (three translations, and three
rotations). Likewise, interface forces become describable by just 6 variables, i.e, their resultants, (axial and shear
forces) and their moment resultants (bending and torsion).

1.2. Simplifications in local equilibrium problems: reduced-order modeling

   Once the simplifying hypothesis regarding the way subdomains interact have been established, one is faced with
the problem of solving the local equilibrium problems — one for each subdomain. In these equilibrium problems, the
aforementioned deformation parameters play the role of inputs — in the form of Dirichlet boundary conditions—,
while the interface force parameters are the outputs. In turn, these equilibrium problems may be solved exactly,
or one may resort, again, to some kind of approximation. The FE-2 method [3], in first-order homogenization,
is a prominent example of the former category, since the fine-scale problem is solved with full details using the
Finite Element (FE) method. Approximate methods, on the other hand, may range from closed-form solutions, like
the simplistic rule of mixtures, to more sophisticated techniques such as the Transformation Field Analysis [4] or
variants thereof [5]. A class of approximated methods that is receiving increasing attention in recent years are those
                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192       3

combining the FE method at the coarse-scale and Reduced-Order Modeling (ROM) at the fine scale [6]. Because
of its relevance within the present work, we describe in the following the basic tenets of these approaches — that
we shall refer henceforth as FE-ROM methods.
   Like classical model reduction methods for linear modal analysis, FE-ROM methods rely on the approximation
of the displacement field of the unit cell as a linear combination of a few characteristic modes. The distinct feature
here is that these modes are not obtained from the FE stiffness and mass matrices of the subdomain, but rather
determined from computational experiments (performed in an offline stage): FE analyses of the unit cell subjected
to representative deformation histories are conducted; and then the set of computed solutions is processed by
dimensionality reduction tools in order to identify and unveil the most statistically dominant displacement modes.
Galerkin projection of the FE equilibrium equations onto the subspace spanned by these modes leads to a reduced-
order model with far fewer equations that the original FE model. To complete the reduction process, the projection
has to be accompanied by an efficient integration rule, tailored to the physics of the problem — ROM with efficient
integration rules are known as Hyperreduced-Order Models (HROM).

1.3. Overall goal

   From a broader perspective, the use of the these dimensionality reduction techniques for solving the local
cell problems may be viewed as a sort of machine learning procedure, in the sense that the simplifications in
such local equilibrium problems are not derived following the old physical-insight based recipe, but rather are
automatically “learned” from the data obtained from a set of representative computational experiments. To put it
more emphatically, the central task of modeling —which is, quoting M. Ashby [7], to “unashamedly distort the
inessentials in order to capture the features that really matter”— is delegated in this case to computer algorithms,
and therefore, it is not subject to the limitations of human judgment.
   The present work attempts to move multiscale structural analysis a step closer to this machine learning paradigm.
We propose a multiscale approach in which dimensionality reduction is used, not only for efficiently solving the local
cell problems, but also for inferring low-dimensional parameterizations for deformations and forces at the unit cell
interfaces. As we argued before, in standard multiscale models, such parameterizations are given a priori, and are
predicated on hypotheses derived from experimental observations and/or purely analytical deductions. Furthermore,
these hypotheses imply severe restrictions on the size of the unit cells, and ignore local effects caused by the
application of external forces and/or displacement constraints.

1.4. Methodology

    The idea proposed here to overcome these intrinsic limitations is to address the modeling of periodic structures
as a reduced-order domain decomposition problem, the qualifier “reduced-order” meaning that interface equations
(equilibrium and compatibility) and subdomain equilibrium equations are projected onto low-dimensional subspaces
—subspaces of the FE spaces associated to the spatial discretization of the subdomains. Similarly to the above
mentioned FE-ROM methods for the unit cells problems, the basis vectors (i.e., the dominant modes) for such
subspaces are extracted from FE analyses using dimensionality reduction techniques — here we use for this purpose
the ubiquitous Singular Value Decomposition, SVD. However, as opposed to the standard FE-ROM methods, in
which the “training” entails FE analyses of one single unit cell under prescribed macro-deformations (using periodic
conditions), in the proposed approach these FE training tests involve several subdomains, for the interest now lies
in learning characteristic patterns of collective behavior, including the way subdomains interact with each other in
terms of force and displacements.
    The partitioning framework adopted in the present work is the Localized Lagrange Multiplier (LLM) method,
proposed by Park et al. in Refs. [8,9]. The reason for favoring this method over other partitioning techniques is
that its three-field formulation provides the ideal framework for our reduced-order multiscale approach. Indeed,
the salient feature of the LLM method is the use of a (fictitious) partition frame, whose displacement is assumed
independent from the displacements of the subdomains. To “glue” such partition frame to the subdomains, Lagrange
multipliers are employed, resulting in a three-field formulation (frame displacements, subdomain displacements and
Lagrange multipliers). We shall approximate these three variables by modal expansions, and the amplitudes of these
expansions will become the coarse-scale variables in our multiscale method — in particular, the amplitude of the
fictitious frame displacement modes will play the role of coarse-scale Degrees of Freedom (DOFs).
4                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 1. Class of periodic structures that can be analyzed with the proposed multiscale approach. (a) to (d) 1D periodicity, (e) 2D periodicity
(shell structure) (f) 3D periodicity.



1.5. Domain of validity

   The multiscale formulation presented in what follows is valid for any periodic structure working within the small,
quasi-static deformation regime. Thus, it can cope with nonlinear material behavior, but not with large rotations
and/or strains. It should be emphasized that the notion of periodicity is to be understood here in a broader sense
than in classical multiscale methods such as the FE2: we regard as periodic any structure formed by repetition of
a given building block – the unit cell – either along a straight or constant-radius line (1D periodicity, Fig. 1.a to
.d); a plane or a constant-radius cylinder (2D periodicity, Fig. 1.e); or along 3 mutually orthogonal directions (3D
periodicity, Fig. 1.f). In the case of 1D periodicity, the resulting domains can be either a typical prismatic structure
(Fig. 1.a), an helix structure (Fig. 1.c), or, if the unit block is allowed to rotate around the directrix, twisted structures
such as turbine blade or screw-like bars (Fig. 1.b and 1.d, respectively).

1.6. Related works

    The present paper can be deemed as a natural extension to general multiscale scenarios of the above mentioned
FE-HROM approaches, pioneered by the author and co-workers in Ref. [6] in the context of structural problems
with small strains and mild nonlinearities — and later refined to cover also problems with more severe nonlinearities
[10–12] as well as to other engineering applications such as magneto-mechanics [13], among others. On the other
hand, the idea of addressing the multiscale problem as a substructuring problem combined with model reduction
is borrowed from the modal synthesis technique known as the Craig–Bampton method [14]. Indeed, similarly to
the Craig–Bampton method, we do approximate the displacements of each subdomain as a linear combination of
modes; however, the way the modes are obtained (we use non-bubble SVD modes), as well as the treatment of the
interface conditions, are totally different in our approach from those in the Craig–Bampton technique. Furthermore,
the Craig–Bampton method and its variants (cf. Ref. [15]) require the explicit computation of the full-order stiffness
matrices of each subdomain, a fact that restricts its scope to linear problems. By contrast, the approach presented here
is valid also when material nonlinearities are present. This key advantage is in turn provided by the aforementioned
hyperreduction, which, in the present work, is applied to the efficient integration of the (reduced) internal forces
of each subdomain. We employ for this integration an algorithmically improved version of the Empirical Cubature
Method (ECM), put forward by the author in Ref. [16]. It should be mentioned that hyperreduction in the context of
domain decomposition problems has been already explored by Kerfriden et al. [17]. However, Kerfriden’s work does
not qualify as “multiscale” in the sense defined here, because the interface conditions are resolved in its original,
full-order format (the only variable subject to modal approximation in Ref. [17] is the displacement of the interior
DOFs).
    An approach that does qualify as multiscale, in the sense defined here, and that bears some resemblance with
our proposal, is the so-called Generalized Multiscale Finite Element Method (GmsFEM), originally developed by
Efendiev and co-workers in Ref. [18]. Efendiev’s approach is a multigrid method whose major ingredients are a set
                      J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                                5

of multiscale basis functions that captures fine-scale features, and a global variational formulation that couples these
multiscale basis functions. As in our proposal, such multiscale basis functions are pre-computed in an offline stage by
solving local problems and applying dimensionality reduction over the resulting solutions. However, Ref. [18] does
not use hyperreduction to alleviate the cost of evaluating the nonlinear terms. Furthermore, the bridging between
the coarse and fine scales is made by defining standard polynomial shape functions at the coarse-scale, and then
making the multiscale basis functions to coincide with such shape functions on the boundaries of the coarse-grid
blocks. This implies, thus, that in the GmsFEM, in the context of equilibrium problems, the coarse-scale kinematics
is defined a priori. This is in sharp contrast to our approach, in which, as pointed out earlier, we explicitly refrain
from making any assumption on the coarse-scale kinematics —rather, we let the model to “learn” from the training
data1 which is the appropriate kinematics for each case.

1.7. Organization of the paper

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 present the employed LLM domain
decomposition framework, describing the geometric setup as well as the involved fine-scale variables. In Section 4,
we explain how to obtain the coarse-scale variables from the modal expansion of their fine-scale counterparts,
whereas Section 5 is devoted to both the variational derivation of the corresponding coarse-scale governing
equations, on the one hand, and the incorporation of the hyperreduction for the term of internal forces, on the
other hand. The pseudo-code of the employed hyperreduction method (the Empirical Cubature Method) is provided
in Appendix A. Section 6 is concerned with the solution strategy for the resulting set of governing, upscaling and
downscaling equations. We show that such equations can be cast into a one-scale format which, remarkably, is
amenable to implementation in existing finite element codes; the guidelines for adapting the implementation to
such codes are provided later on, in both Section 8 and Appendix B. In Section 7, we describe thoroughly all the
offline steps necessary for generating the training data and computing the reduced-order operators, including also the
crucial issue of how to ensure the solvability of the coarse-scale equations. Finally, Section 9 contains a numerical
assessment containing 4 distinct types of structures.
    Given the length of the paper, and in order not to discourage the more programming-oriented reader, we have
summarized all the implementation steps in Box I (offline stage) and Box II (online stage). The logic of the proposed
methodology can be followed without the finer details from the information in such Boxes.

2. Geometric setup
2.1. Unit cell

   Let Ω ⊂ Rn sd denote the domain under study (n sd = 2, 3). As illustrated in Fig. 2.a, this domain is assumed to
consist of M non-overlapping, geometrically identical subdomains Ω e (e = 1, 2 . . . M). This means that each Ω e
can be mapped onto a single reference subdomain Ω̄ —the unit cell—by means of translations and rotations. On
the other hand, the boundary of the unit cell, denoted by ∂ Ω̄ , is assumed to be divided as follows (see Fig. 2.d):
                  Interface boundaries
                                   
       ∂ Ω̄ = ∂ Ω̄1 ∪ ∂ Ω̄2 · · · ∂ Ω̄l ∪∂ Ω̄ non .                                                                                          (1)
              l
Here {∂ Ω̄i }i=1 denotes the interface boundaries (the boundaries that can be potentially connected to other
subdomains), while ∂ Ω̄ non designates the remaining portions, that we call non-interface boundaries. The number
of interface boundaries can be either l = 2, l = 4 or l = 6 (1D, 2D o 3D periodicity, respectively). The interface
boundaries are assumed to be plane and not to intersect with each other2 (∂ Ω̄i ∩ ∂ Ω̄ j = ∅, i ̸= j). Furthermore,

  1 Incidentally, it should be noticed that the idea that the coarse-scale kinematics is not pre-defined by the user but extracted from a set of
(computational) experiments is very much aligned with the spirit of the “data-driven” paradigm recently proposed by Kirchdoerfer et Ortiz
in Ref. [19].
  2 This prerequisite is introduced for simplicity in dealing with the underlying domain decomposition problem (it avoids special treatment
of intersection entities in 2D and 3D periodicity). In theory, this does not restrict the scope of the approach, since unit cells with continuous
interface boundaries may be considered as limiting cases.
6                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 2. (a) Partition of the domain into M identical domains. (b) Coarse-scale representation of the structure of Figure a. The coarse-scale
nodes are located at the centroids of the interface boundaries. (c) Domain partition scheme. The connection between domains are established
through fictitious interfaces, whose displacements are assumed to be independent from those of the neighboring domains. (d) Geometric
definition of the unit cell, showing the distinction between interface boundaries (∂ Ω̄1 and ∂ Ω̄2 ) and non-interface boundaries (∂ Ω̄1non and
∂ Ω̄2non ).



geometrical compatibility of contiguous subdomains (periodicity) requires that the boundary interfaces be pairwise
identical, i.e.:
              l
       {∂ Ω̄i }i=1 = ∂ Ω̄ + ∪ ∂ Ω̄ − ,                                                                                                     (2)
such that for any ∂ Ω̄i+       (i =      1, 2 . . . l/2), there is a ∂ Ω̄i−   which can be transformed into ∂ Ω̄i+   by means of a
translation and a rotation.
     Two coordinate systems are employed to describe the displacement of each subdomain: a global, common system,
                                                               n sd
characterized by the triad of unit orthogonal vectors {e i }i=1     ; and a local reference system intrinsic to each subdomain
                                           e n sd
Ω , and determined by the triad {ê i }i=1 (e = 1, 2 . . . M). The vector ê1e is chosen to be normal to the interface
   e

boundary ∂Ω1e , and pointing toward the inside of the domain — so that the normal of boundary ∂Ω1e is −ê1e ,
see Fig. 2.a. The coordinates of the local triad on the global reference system are stored in a rotation matrix
     e                                                                   n sd
[ Q̂ ]i j = eTi êej . We also attach a local coordinate system {ẽi, j } j=1 (i = 1, 2 . . . l) to each of the interface boundaries
of the unit cell (see Fig. 2.d). The coordinates of this triad in the local reference system of the unit cell are stored in
a rotation matrix Q i (i = 1, 2 . . . l). By convention, we set ẽ1, j = êej ( j = 1, 2 . . . n sd ); thus Q 1 = I, where I is the
n sd × n sd identity matrix. Accordingly, in 1D problems, Q 2 will define the rotation of the interface boundary ∂ Ω̄2
with respect to ∂ Ω̄1 , as illustrated in Fig. 2.d. On the other hand, in 2D cylindrical structures, such as the one shown
previously in Fig. 1.e, we shall adopt the convention of labeling the interface boundaries such that Q 1 = Q 2 = Q 4
and Q 3 ̸= I (this convention will be further explained later on, in the example of Section 9.5).

2.2. Fictitious interfaces and “coarse-scale mesh”

   As pointed out in the introduction, the interface conditions between adjacent domains are not established directly
                                                                                                                 l
but through a “fictitious” partition frame [9], denoted here by {Γ I } NI=1 (global description), or by {Γ̄i }i=1 (local
description). In the undeformed configuration, the fictitious interfaces coincide with the interface boundaries of
the subdomains, and their connectivity is given by an array T ; the (e, k) entry of this array indicates the global
numbering of the fictitious interface connected to the interface boundary ∂Ωke . For instance, in the example given
in Fig. 2.c, we see that T (e, 1) = I and T (e, 2) = J .
   The description of the interconnection is completed by providing the position in the global reference system of the
centroids of each fictitious interface, denoted by {X∗cI } NI=1 . These position vectors, along with the connectivity array
T (·, ·), constitute what we call the coarse-scale description of the domain Ω . This coarse-scale description, thus,
ignores the exact geometry and composition of the subdomains, and only takes into consideration the position and
geometry of the interfaces. Symbolically, we may represent it as the union of all fictitious interfaces: Γ = ∪ NI=1 Γ I .
Its boundary, denoted by ∂Γ , is formed by those interfaces only connected with one subdomain, i.e., those
J ∈ {1, 2 . . . N } that only appears in one row of T . This set is denoted by b. For pre- and post-processing purposes,
                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192              7

it proves advantageous to go further in this geometric “coarsening” and portray the domain as a finite element
mesh in which (some of) their nodes coincide with the centroids of the interfaces — therefore ignoring as well
the geometrical features of the interfaces. Accordingly, in 1D periodicity, the resulting coarse-scale mesh would
be a 1D discretization of a line or curve (see Fig. 2.b), while in 2D periodicity, the coarse-scale mesh would be a
quadrilateral mesh (with the nodes located on the sides).
                                                 n sd
     Lastly, a local coordinate system {ēI j } j=1   is attached to each fictitious interface Γ I (I = 1, 2 . . . N ). The
coordinates of the interface triad in the global reference system are given by the columns of the matrix [ Q̄ I ]k j :=
eTk ēI j . We shall assume this triad is oriented as the local reference axes for the interface boundaries of the unit cell;
thus, it follows that
                e
      Q̄ I = Q̂ Q i ,                                                                                                    (3)
where I = T (e, i).

2.3. Fine-scale mesh

   The unit cell Ω̄ is discretized by a finite element mesh featuring n nodes and m elements. We shall refer to this
spatial discretization as the fine-scale mesh. The DOFs of the interface boundary ∂ Ω̄i are denoted by fi , and the
vector formed by stacking all these vectors in a single column matrix by f:
                               ]T
      f = f1T f2T · · · flT .
           [
                                                                                                                 (4)
We assume that the discretization is such that the mesh at the interface boundary ∂ Ω̄i+ matches the mesh at ∂ Ω̄i−
(i = 1 . . . l/2). Furthermore, for simplicity, it is assumed that the kth entry of fi+ corresponds to the kth entry of
                                                                                               n
fi− . The nodal coordinates of the mesh in the local reference system are denoted by {Xi′}i=1 (X ′ ∈ Rn sd ), and the
                                                          m gs
positions of all the Gauss points of the mesh by {xg }g=1 .
                                             l
   Likewise, the fictitious interfaces {Γ̄i }i=1 are discretized using a mesh which is conforming to the discretization
of the unit cell at the corresponding interface boundaries. The coordinates of the kth node of the mesh of Γ̄i in
                                                                                                       ′
the local system attached to the interface (located at the centroid, see Fig. 2.c) is denoted by Yi(k)   . We assume
again for simplicity that the ordering of the DOFs of the domain and fictitious interfaces is direct, meaning that
the positions in the undeformed configuration of the kth node of the fictitious interface Γ̄i and the kth node of the
domain interface ∂ Ω̄i coincide.

3. Fine-scale variables
    Next we describe the set of variables defined on the finite element mesh of each subdomain and each
fictitious interface. This set includes four nodal variables (domain displacements, Lagrange multipliers, interface
displacements and external forces); and two variables defined at Gauss points (stresses and strains). In our multiscale
framework, these magnitudes will play the role of fine-scale variables.

3.1. Domain variables

3.1.1. Displacements and Lagrange multipliers
   The vectors of nodal displacements and Lagrange multipliers of domain Ω e (expressed in the subdomain
reference system), are denoted by d e ∈ Rn do f and λe ∈ Rn do f , respectively (n do f = n · n sd ). These vectors are
partitioned as follows
                                                                              λ f1
                                 ⎡ e ⎤                                      ⎡ e ⎤
                                   d f1
                                 ⎢ d ef ⎥                                   ⎢λef ⎥
                                                     λf
            [ e]                                    [ e]
             d                   ⎢ 2⎥
       d e = ef , where d ef = ⎢ . ⎥ ,         λe =      , where λef = ⎢ . ⎥ .
                                                                            ⎢ 2⎥
                                                                                                                    (5)
              dS                 ⎣ .. ⎦               0                     ⎣ .. ⎦
                                   d ef l                                     λef l
Here, d ef and λef denote the nodal displacements and nodal Lagrange multipliers of the interface boundaries, while
d eS stands for the displacements of the remaining nodes — note that at such nodes the Lagrange multipliers are
zero, i.e. λeS = 0.
8                       J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

3.1.2. Strains, stresses and internal forces
   The infinitesimal strain vector at the gth Gauss point of the mesh of domain Ω e is denoted by εe (xg ) ∈ Rs
(s = 4, 6 for 2D and 3D problems, respectively); the relation between this vector and the nodal displacements of
the domain is established through the expression:
      εe (xg ) = B(xg )d e ,                                                                                         (6)
where B(xg ) is the strain–displacement matrix (in its global, sparse format) associated to the gth Gauss point. On
the other hand, the stress vector at Gauss point xg is designated by σ e (xg ) ∈ Rs . Its relation to the strain vector
and its past history at a given instant is assumed to be given by a general constitutive relationship, symbolically
represented here as
      σ e (xg ) = H εe (xg ), ξ e (xg ); xg ,
                   (                       )
                                                                                                                    (7)
ξ e (xg ) being a vector of internal variables. Lastly, the vector of internal forces is computed by
                 m gs
                 ∑
      Fient =           B T(xg )Wg σ e (xg ),                                                                        (8)
                 g=1

where Wg ∈ R stands for the product of the Gauss weight and the Jacobian at the Gauss point xg .

3.1.3. External forces
   The vector of nodal external forces acting on subdomain Ω e is denoted by Fexe t (expressed in the domain reference
system). In the proposed partitioning framework, this vector is assumed to contain body forces, on the one hand,
and, on the other hand, surface tractions acting on the non-interface boundaries ∂ Ω̄non :
                 Body forces       Tractions on ∂ Ω̄non
                                      
      Fexe t =      Fbe        +           Ft re          .                                                          (9)
As will be explained later, forces acting on interface boundaries are regarded as applied on their associated fictitious
interfaces rather than on the subdomains themselves.

3.2. Fictitious interface variables

3.2.1. Interface displacements
    In analogy to standard finite element formulations, we shall use global and local descriptions for referring to the
vector of nodal displacements for the fictitious interfaces. On the one hand, the displacements of a given interface
Γ I (I = 1, 2 . . . N ) is denoted by u I —this is the global description. On the other hand, the vector of interface
displacements of a given subdomain Ω e (e = 1, 2 . . . M) is defined by
             ⎡ e⎤
               u1
             ⎢ ue ⎥
             ⎢ 2⎥
       ue := ⎢ . ⎥ ,                                                                                               (10)
             ⎣ .. ⎦
                  ule
(this is the local point of view). Both global and local vectors are assumed to be expressed in the reference frame
attached to the interfaces. The connection between global and local descriptions is established via the coarse-scale
connectivity matrix, i.e.:
      uie = u I , if I = T (e, i).                                                                                  (11)
The local point of view allow us to compactly write the compatibility conditions between subdomains and fictitious
interfaces. Indeed, the difference between the displacements of the interface boundaries of a given domain and the
nodal displacements of the surrounding fictitious interfaces can be expressed as d ef − Que , where
      Q := diag (Q1 , Q2 , · · · , Ql )                                                                             (12)
and
      Q j = diag ( Q j , Q j , · · · , Q j ).                                                                       (13)
                      J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                               9




Fig. 3. Proposed decompositions for: (a) Nodal displacements d e of each subdomain Ω e into rigid-body and straining parts (see Eq. (14)).
The amplitude q e of the straining modes are the generalized coarse-scale strains in our multiscale framework. (b) Nodal reactive forces
λe into resultant and self-equilibrating components (see Eq. (20)). The amplitudes r e of the self-equilibrating modes will play the role of
generalized coarse-scale stresses. (c) Nodal displacements of each fictitious interface into rigid-body and straining components (see Eq. (32)).
The amplitude aie of both rigid-body and straining modes constitute the generalized coarse-scale DOFs of our model. (d) Nodal external
forces into equivalent interface and self-equilibrating components (see Eq. (28)).



3.2.2. Interface external forces
   The interface external forces are those traction loads applied on interface boundaries (more specifically, on
interface boundaries not connected with other subdomains). We denote by F̄J the nodal vector, expressed in the
local reference system attached to the interface, of the traction loads acting on the interface boundary associated to
Γ J (J ∈ b).

4. Low-dimensional modal approximations

4.1. Domain displacements

   Now we address the low-dimensional parametrization of the fine scale variables defined in the foregoing.
We begin by the domain nodal displacements d e . As is customary in partitioning problems in the small strains
regime [9], the total displacements is decomposed as the sum of rigid body and straining components (see Fig. 3.a):
              Rigid body    Straining
                   
         e
       d =      Rα e + Φq e .                                                                                                             (14)
                                                                                                               ∗
Here, R ∈ Rn do f ×nr b (n r b = 3, 6 for 2D and 3D problems, respectively) and Φ ∈ Rn do f ×n stand for the matrices of
rigid body and straining modes, respectively. The number of straining modes, n ∗ , is assumed to be much smaller
than the number of DOFs of the domain (n ∗ ≪ n do f ).
   The matrix of rigid body modes R can be further partitioned into translational (R t ) and rotational (R r ) modes.
Taking the centroid Xc′ as reference point, the expression for such matrices for a given node i reads (for 3D problems)
                                                            −(∆Xi′)3 (∆Xi′)2
                                                ⎡                                 ⎤
                                                     0
       R t i = I,    R r i = −spin(∆Xi′) = − ⎣ (∆Xi′)3           0      −(∆Xi′)1 ⎦                                  (15)
                                                        ′          ′
                                                  −(∆Xi )2 (∆Xi )1           0
(here ∆Xi′ = Xi′ − Xc′ ). The corresponding amplitudes α et ∈ Rn sd and α er ∈ Rnr ot (n r ot = 1, 3 for 2D and 3D) are
thus the translation of the centroid and the (infinitesimal) rotation angles, respectively. We further postulate that the
straining modes Φ are mutually orthogonal, and, besides, M-orthogonal to the rigid body modes:
       Φ T Φ = I,              Φ T M R = 0,                                                                                               (16)
10                       J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

M being the (geometric3 ) nodal mass matrix of the unit cell Ω̄ . Furthermore

4.1.1. Coarse-scale strains
   Substitution of Eq. (14) into Eq. (6) yields
      εe (xg ) = B(xg )Rα e + B(xg )Φq e ,                          g = 1, 2 . . . m gs .                                          (17)
Since rigid body motions produce no strain, we have that B(xg )R = 0, and therefore
      εe (xg ) = B ∗ (xg )q e ,                    g = 1, 2 . . . m gs                                                             (18)
where
        B ∗ (xg ) := B(xg )Φ.                                                                                                      (19)
   Notice that Eq. (18) represents a low-dimensional parametrization of the fine-scale strains of the subdomain Ω e
in terms of the amplitudes of the straining modes of such a domain. For this reason, one may interpret q e as the
vector of generalized coarse-scale strains. In turn, in the light of this interpretation, Eq. (18) may be viewed as a
strain downscaling equation, for it allows us to, once q e has been calculated, recover the (fine-scale) strains at any
Gauss point of the domain Ω e .

4.2. Lagrange multipliers (reactive forces)

    For the vector of nodal Lagrange multipliers of domain Ω e , we propose a decomposition analogous to Eq. (14),
i.e.:
                              Self-equilibrating
                                   
      λ = R̄β +
         e          e
                                   Ψ re                                                                                            (20)
where
        R T Ψ = 0,              and        Ψ T Ψ = I.                                                                              (21)
In Eq. (20), R̄ stands for the following matrix
           [ ] [              ]
             R̄ f      Mf Rf
      R̄ =         =            ,                                                                                                  (22)
             R̄ S         0
i.e., a matrix in which the rows corresponding to the interface boundaries DOFs are equal to the rigid body modes
times the mass matrix — and zero at the remaining rows. On the other hand, Ψ ∈ Rn do f × p designates the matrix
of self-equilibrating reactive modes. Like the straining modes Φ, this matrix is determined empirically from FE,
full-order analyses via dimensionality reduction. The qualifier “self-equilibrating” refers to the fact that, according
to condition ((21).a), each column of this matrix forms a system of nodal forces whose resultant and moment
resultant are zero (see Fig. 3.b). This follows easily from Eqs. (5) and (15); indeed, for the ith mode we have that
                    n
                    ∑                                                    n
                                                                         ∑                             n
                                                                                                       ∑
        R Tt Ψi =             Ψi j = 0,            and     R Tr Ψi = −          spin(∆X ′j )Ψi j = −         ∆X ′j × Ψi j = 0.     (23)
                        j=1                                               j=1                          j=1

4.2.1. Coarse-scale stresses
   In much the same way we have interpreted the amplitudes of the straining modes q e as the generalized coarse-
scale strains, we may view r e as the vector of generalized coarse-scale stresses of the domain Ω e , for they represent
a low-dimensional parametrization of the reactive forces between Ω e and its neighboring subdomains. In fact, the
reason for enforcing the condition that Ψ must be a system of self-equilibrating forces is to ensure that r e is, in
some sense, the work conjugate of q e . Indeed, the work done by these modes over virtual rigid body displacements
is zero, and therefore
             T                    T
      δd e Ψ r e = δq e H r e ,                                                                                                    (24)
  3 Similar to the standard nodal mass matrix, but with density equal to one. Using the variables defined later in Appendix B, it can be
                   ∑m gs T
calculated as M = g=1    N (xg )Wg N(xg ).
                            J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192     11

where
                                                   [ ]              l
                                                  ] Ψf              ∑
        H := Φ Ψ = Φ Tf T
                                            ΦST        = Φ Tf Ψ f =   Φ Tf i Ψ f i .
                  [
                                                                                                                        (25)
                                                    0
                                                                                     i=1

The matrix defined above will play a critical role in the stability and the well-posedness of the overall problem.
Physically, Hi j represents the work done by the jth self-equilibrating force mode when the interface boundary nodes
move along the ith straining pattern. It can be argued thus that, in order to avoid having coarse-scale stresses that
do not contribute to the coarse-scale work, the kernel of this matrix must be zero
      ker(H) = {0}.                                                                                                     (26)
This condition implies that rank(H) = p, which means, in turn, that
        p ≤ n∗,                                                                                                         (27)
that is, in our multiscale formulation, the number of coarse-scale stress components must be equal or less than the
number of coarse-scale strain components.

4.2.2. Equivalent and self-equilibrating forces
   It proves convenient to introduce at this point a decomposition similar to that in Eq. (20) for the input vector of
nodal external forces on domain Ω e :
                   Equiv. interf. forces        Self-equilib.
                                               
        Fexe t =             Feqe          +        Fsee                                                                (28)
where
        Feqe := R̄(R T R̄)−1 (R T Fexe t )                                                                              (29)
and
        Fsee := Fexe t − Feqe .                                                                                         (30)
As illustrated in Fig. 3.d, the term Feqe in Eq. (29) is a vector of nodal forces which are different from zero only at
the nodes of the interface boundaries (this follows from the definition of R̄ in Eq. (22)), and whose resultant and
moment resultant are identical4 to that of Fexe t , i.e.:
        R T Feqe = R T Fexe t .                                                                                         (31)
For this reason, we shall refer to this variable as the vector of equivalent interface nodal forces on domain Ω e .
Conversely, Fsee will be called the vector of self-equilibrating nodal forces on domain Ω e , since its resultant and
moment resultant are zero (this is readily seen by multiplying Eq. (30) by R T ).

4.3. Fictitious interface displacements

   Now we address the parametrization of the nodal displacements of the fictitious interfaces of domain Ω e
(e = 1, 2 . . . M). We postulate for uie (i = 1, 2 . . . l) a decomposition similar to the one used in Eq. (14) for
domain displacements (see Fig. 3.c):
               Rigid body           Straining
                   
      uie = V̄i āie + V̂i âie = Vi aie ,                        i = 1, 2 . . . l                                      (32)
where
                                                        [ e]
                                                         āi
                            V̂i ,               aie =         .
          [                    ]
      Vi = V̄i                                                                                                          (33)
                                                         âie

 4 Formally, F e is an (oblique) projection of F                       onto the column space of R̄.
                   eq                                           ex t
12                       J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

Here V̄i āie stands for the rigid body component, whereas V̂i âie represents the straining part. The translational V̄ ti
and rotational V̄ ri rigid body modes are calculated as in Eq. (15):
      ( V̄ ti ) j = I,          ( V̄ ri ) j = −spin(Yi′ j − Yic′ ).                                                  (34)
The straining modes V̂i , on the other hand, are assumed to be mutually M-orthogonal, as well as M-orthogonal to
the rigid body modes:
        T                              T
      V̂i M̄i V̂i = I,              V̂i M̄i V̄i = 0,       i = 1, 2 . . . l                                          (35)
where M̄i denotes the “geometric” mass matrix of interface Γ̄i = ∂ Ω̄i . Lastly, periodicity dictates that the modes
of ∂ Ω̄ − be equal to the modes of ∂ Ω̄ + . We symbolically express this condition as
      Vi + = Vi −              i = 1, 2 . . . l/2.                                                                   (36)
For 1D periodicity, for instance, this implies that V1 = V2 , whereas for 2D periodicity, we have V1 = V3 , and
V2 = V4 .

4.3.1. Coarse-scale DOFs
   We pointed out in Section 2.2 that, in the proposed multiscale framework, the coarse-scale description only
accounts for the kinematics of the fictitious interfaces, ignoring the subdomains. Accordingly, we shall assign to
the amplitudes of the interface displacement modes the role of coarse-scale DOFs. The basic unknown of the
coarse-scale problem will be therefore the vector formed by gathering all the interface contributions in a single
column matrix:
          ⎡ ⎤
             a1
          ⎢ a2 ⎥
      a = ⎢ . ⎥,                                                                                              (37)
          ⎢ ⎥
          ⎣ .. ⎦
            aN
where
      a I = aie ,         if I = T (e, i).                                                                           (38)
From definition (10), it follows that the nodal fictitious displacements associated to domain Ω e are expressible in
terms of coarse-scale DOFs as
      ue = Vae ,                                                                                                     (39)
where
                                                           ⎡ e⎤
                                                            a1
                                                           ⎢ae ⎥
                                                           ⎢ 2⎥
      V := diag (V1 , V2 , . . . , Vl ),             ae := ⎢ . ⎥ .                                                   (40)
                                                           ⎣ .. ⎦
                                                            ale
The vector ae defined in the preceding equation is the local coarse-scale DOFs of domain Ω e . In analogy to standard
finite element formulations, we introduce a coarse-scale Boolean matrix Le to relate this local domain vector to
the global vector defined in Eq. (37):
      ae = Le a                                                                                                      (41)

5. Variational principle
   Having defined the fine-scale and coarse-scale variables, the next step consists in determining the constitutive,
compatibility and equilibrium equations for the coarse-scale variables, as well as the stress upscaling equation.
According to the employed variational partitioning framework [9], these equations emerge from the stationary
conditions of the following energy functional:
      Π = Πi nt − Πex t − π.                                                                                         (42)
                      J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                          13

Here, Πi nt denotes the contribution of strain energy, Πex t stands for the part due to external forces, while π is the
so-called interface or dislocation potential. Taking variations of Eq. (42), we get
       δΠ = δΠi nt − δΠex t − δπ.                                                                                                      (43)
In the following, we elaborate on each of the three terms of the right-hand side of the preceding equation.

5.1. Internal virtual work

   The total internal virtual work in Eq. (43) is calculated by summing the contributions of all the subdomains:
                  M
                  ∑
       δΠi nt =         δΠient                                                                                                         (44)
                  e=1
                                                                                              T
In turn, the contribution of a given subdomain Ω e is given by δΠient = δd e Fient . Taking variations of Eq. (14);
using Eqs. (8) and (19); and considering that rigid body motions do not produce straining, we obtain
                                              m gs
                           T            T     ∑
       δΠient = (δα e R T + δq e Φ T )               B T(xg )Wg σ e (xg )
                                              g=1
                           m gs                                                                                                        (45)
                      eT
                           ∑
               = δq               B (xg )Wg σ (xg ).
                                   ∗T         e

                           g=1


5.1.1. Empirical cubature of virtual work
    Note that the evaluation of the virtual work in the preceding equation requires summing up the contribution of all
the m gs Gauss points of the underlying (fine-scale) mesh. This is because we are using the same integration rule as
for the nodal internal forces in Eq. (8), that is, element-wise Gauss quadrature. This dependence on the total number
of Gauss-points of the unit cell mesh would render the overall approach ostensibly inefficient and impractical in
nonlinear scenarios, for one would be forced to track and store the strains, the stresses and the internal variables at
all the Gauss points of each subdomain.
    Fortunately, there is no need to use all such Gauss points for the integration. As shown by the author in Ref. [6]
(in the context of multiscale homogenization problems), since displacements are constrained to lie in a subspace
of dimension n ∗ ≪ n do f , then the corresponding strains and stresses are also expected to reside in subspaces of
dimension O(n ∗ ). This implies that the virtual work per unit volume — the product of stresses and strains — is of
dimensionality O(n ∗2 ), and therefore, O(n ∗2 ) points5 suffice to evaluate δΠient in Eq. (45).
    In the present work, such integration points are optimally chosen among the set of mesh Gauss points by means
of a constrained optimization procedure that guarantees the positiveness of the weights — the Empirical Cubature
Method, ECM for short, developed by the author in Ref. [16]. We present in Appendix A an algorithmically
improved version of this ECM algorithm. Let Z ⊂ {1, 2 . . . m gs } denote the set of m ∗gs indexes corresponding
to the chosen points, and6 {ω(xg )}g∈Z the set of corresponding positive weights. With these two variables at hand,
we can approximate the virtual internal work in Eq. (45) by
                     T∑
       δΠient = δq e      B ∗T(xg )ω(xg )σ e (xg ).                                                               (46)
                           g∈Z

Note that this expression is formally identical to Eq. (45); the only differences are that, on the one hand, the sum
is taken over the Gauss points belonging to the set Z, and that, on the other hand, we have replaced the FE weights
Wg by the ECM weights ω(xg ).

   5 The number of points needed to integrate a function residing in a subspace of dimension n is of the order of O(n) points. For instance,
for a polynomial of order p (and therefore of dimensionality p + 1), the number of points is equal to ( p + 1)/2 when using Gauss quadrature
(the optimal quadrature rule), and p + 1 when employing Newton-Cotes.
   6 ω(x ) indicates the weight associated to the ECM point located at x .
        g                                                                 g
14                         J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

5.2. External virtual work

   The external work term δΠex t in Eq. (43) is composed of two contributions: work done by body forces and
tractions applied on the non-interface boundaries (described in Section 3.1.3); and work done by tractions applied on
the coarse-scale boundary ( F̄J ), described in Section 3.2.2. Taking variations of Eqs. (14) and (32), and multiplying
by the corresponding forces, we can express the total virtual external work as7
                     M                               M
                     ∑          T                    ∑         T                     ∑          T
         δΠex t =           δα e R T Fexe t +              δq e Φ T Fexe t + δa T             L̄ I VIT F̄I                               (47)
                     e=1                             e=1                             I ∈b

where L̄ I is a boolean matrix such that a I = L̄ I a.

5.3. Interface potential

     The interface potential π is defined by
              M               M
              ∑               ∑         T
         π=          πe =           λe (d ef − Que ),                                                                                    (48)
               e=1            e=1

Taking variations we get
                       T                                   T       T
         δπ e = δλe (d ef − Que ) + (δd ef − δue QT )λe .                                                                                (49)
Next we replace the expressions for λe , d ef and ue (Eq. (20), Eq. (14) and Eq. (39), respectively), as well as their
variations, in Eq. (49); this leads, upon factoring out the variations of each variable, to
                  T                       T (
       δπ e = δα e (R Tf R̄ f β e ) + δq e Φ Tf R̄ f β e + Φ Tf Ψ f r e
                                                                        )

            + δr e Ψ Tf Φ f q e − Ψ Tf QVae
                  (                            )
                   ( T                 T             T
                                                            )                                                     (50)
            + δβ e R̄ f R f α e + R̄ f Φ f q e − R̄ f QVae
                  T (
            − δae V T QT R̄ f β e + V T QT Ψ f r e .
                                                         )

For notational compactness, we define the following reduced-order matrices
         H̄ := Φ Tf R̄ f ,                G := R Tf R̄ f                                                                                 (51)
                                  l
                                  ∑                                              T
         T := Ψ Tf QV =                 Ψ Tf i Qi Vi ,             T̄ := R̄ f QV.                                                        (52)
                                  i=1

With these matrices at hand, and using Eqs. (41), (25) and (50), the variation of Eq. (48) can be finally written as
                M                   M (
                ∑                   ∑            T                 T                                           ))
         δπ =          δπ e =               δα e Gβ e + δq e               H̄β e + H r e + δr e H T q e − T ae
                                                                       (                )      (

                 e=1                e=1
                                     M (
                                                                                                                                         (53)
                                                     (                 T
                                                                                         )                   (    T
                                                                                                                                ))
                                                          eT                                            eT
                                    ∑
                              +             δβ   e
                                                         G α + H̄ q − T̄ a
                                                               e             e       e
                                                                                             − δa L T
                                                                                                                 T̄ β + T r
                                                                                                                      e   T e
                                                                                                                                     .
                                    e=1


5.4. Stationary points of the functional

   The stationary points of the proposed functional follow from equating to zero the terms multiplying δα e , δq e ,
δr , δa and δβ e in Eqs. (44), (47) and (53).
     e


  7 With some abuse of notation, we employ the same symbol for denoting the local and global counterpart of the interface modes matrix.
To distinguish them, we use small letter indexes for local description (Vi ), and capital letter indexes for global description (VI ).
                       J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                            15

5.4.1. Resultants of domain external forces
   We begin with the variations of the amplitudes of the rigid body domain displacement δα e . Gathering the terms
from Eqs. (47) and (53), we get
        − R T Fexe t − Gβ e = 0,                e = 1, 2 . . . M.                                                                        (54)
Solving the above for β e , and using Eq. (51).b, we obtain
       β e = −(R Tf R̄ f )−1 R T Fexe t .                                                                                                (55)

5.4.2. Coarse-scale equilibrium
   As for the terms multiplying δa, we get from Eqs. (47) and (53) that
                             Equiv. interf. forces
                              Boundary forces
        M               M          ∑  
        ∑        T     ∑     T             T
               e   T e
              L T r =      e   e
                          L Feq +       L̄ I F̄I .                                                                                       (56)
        e=1                    e=1                   I ∈b

where
       F̄I := VIT F̄I ,           I ∈b                                                                                                   (57)
and
                       T
       Feqe := − T̄ β e = (V T QT R̄ f )(R Tf R̄ f )−1 R T Fexe t = V T QT Feq,
                                                                             e
                                                                                f,              e = 1, 2 . . . M.                        (58)
   Expression (56) constitutes the coarse-scale equilibrium equation of our multiscale problem, for it represents
a balance between coarse-scale internal forces (depending on the generalized coarse-scale stresses r e , left-hand
side) and coarse-scale external forces (right-hand side). Such external forces are in turn formed by assembling the
contribution of two distinct terms, namely: (coarse-scale) boundary forces and (coarse-scale) equivalent interface
forces. The latter is called this way because, as it follows from Eq. (58), it emanates from upscaling the fine-scale
vector of equivalent interface nodal forces Feqe (given in turn in Eq. (29)). Likewise, F̄I in Eq. (57) is called the
vector of coarse-scale boundary forces because it arises from projecting the nodal forces F̄I acting on the boundary
of the coarse-scale geometry onto the span of VI .

5.4.3. Stress upscaling equation
   Next we group the terms corresponding to the variations of the straining amplitudes δq e (from Eqs. (44), (46),
(47) and (53)). Upon some manipulation (using Eqs. (51), (54) and (30)), we arrive at
              ∑
      H re =      B ∗T(xg )ω(xg )σ e (xg ) − Φ T Fsee , e = 1, 2 . . . M.                                     (59)
                 g∈Z

The above equation is our stress upscaling equation, because it relates the generalized coarse-scale stresses r e (left-
hand side) to its fine-scale counterpart {σ e (xg )}g∈Z (right-hand side). Notice that the external forces also appear
in this upscaling equation — through its self-equilibrating component Fsee , defined in Eq. (30), and pictorially
depicted in Fig. 3.d. It should be highlighted that this is a distinguishing feature of our approach, for standard
multiscale theories, such as FE beam/shell theories or first- and second-order homogenization, ignore this self-
equilibrating component, and only consider external domain forces through its equivalent interface component Feqe
in the coarse-scale equilibrium equation — hence their inability to capture local effects.8

5.4.4. Coarse-scale strain–displacement equation
   The only term multiplying the variations of the amplitudes of the self-equilibrating modes δr e appears in Eq. (53);
equating this term to zero, we obtain the relationship between coarse-scale strains and displacements:
        H T q e = T ae ,             e = 1, 2 . . . M.                                                                                   (60)
   8 For instance, in beam theories, if a longitudinal “slice” is subjected to a system of lateral self-equilibrating forces, then the slice is
(incorrectly) considered unstressed. By contrast, our approach can accurately deal with this type of local effects, as we shall demonstrate
later in the example of Section 9.3.
16                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

5.4.5. Rigid-body amplitudes
   The remaining coarse-scale kinematic condition is the relationship between displacements, strains and rigid-body
motion of each subdomain. This equation can be deduced from gathering and equating to zero the terms multiplying
δβ e in Eq. (53):
                     T
       G T α e + H̄ q e − T̄ ae = 0,              e = 1, 2 . . . M.                                                                      (61)
Note that, since G is by construction invertible, the rigid body vector α e can be obtained a posteriori, once q e and
ae have been determined.

6. Solution strategy
   Prior to launching into the specific details of the solution strategy, let us first summarize the equations and
unknowns of the multiscale problem we have described in the preceding sections. We have a total of five sets
of unknowns, namely, the coarse-scale strains, stresses and displacements (q e , r e and a, respectively); and the
fine-scale strains and stresses (εe (xg ), σ e (xg ), respectively). The total number of governing equations is five as
well: 2 coarse-scale equations (equilibrium and the stress–displacements relationship, see Eqs. (56) and (60)); 2
upscaling/downscaling equations (the stress upscaling and strain downscaling mappings, see Eqs. (59) and (18));
and one fine-scale equation (the constitutive law, see Eq. (7)).

6.1. Hierarchical versus inter-scale approach

     In principle, the strategy for solving this set of five matrix equations would be similar to that of other hierarchical
two-scale methods such as the FE2 or the FE-HROM. Indeed, notice that four of the involved variables (namely,
q e , r e , εe (xg ), σ e (xg )) are local —they are defined at subdomain level — whereas just one of them is global (the
coarse-scale DOFs a). Likewise, there are 4 local and 1 global equations. The global equation is the coarse-scale
equilibrium (56), which depends solely on the coarse-scale stresses r e . Thus, the gist of the strategy would be to,
given a tentative coarse-scale displacement a, solve first the local equations in order to determine the corresponding
coarse-scale stresses r e (e = 1, 2 . . . M). If such stresses are not in equilibrium with the applied external actions,
then the linearized version of the equilibrium equation would be used to determine a correction for the coarse-scale
displacements — and so on until convergence.
     The computer implementation of this type of hierarchical approaches is a cumbersome, laborious task — as
anyone familiar with the intricacies of the FE2 will attest. The fact that stresses and strains at the scale of interest
are not related through an empirical constitutive law compels one to deploy a special algorithmic infrastructure of
intertwined local/global problems, wherein convergence issues are difficult to spot and debug.
     Fortunately, in the proposed multiscale framework, it is possible to circumvent this nested sequence of
local/global, and produce a simplified “inter-scale” formulation which, remarkably, is amenable to implementation
in a standard finite element code. The key insight for understanding how to arrive at this simplified strategy is
concealed in the condition rank(H) = p, presented in Section 4.2.1. Physically, such a condition indicates that one
may include more straining modes than reactive modes, provided that at least p of such straining modes effectively
contribute to the total coarse-scale work. An immediate corollary is that if n ∗ > p, then there is a straining subspace
of dimension n ∗ − p whose motions are either energetically irrelevant or redundant to the coarse-scale.9 In the light
of this observation, it is natural to wonder whether there would be any algorithmic advantage in excluding these
irrelevant or redundant modes from the straining modes matrix Φ. We next demonstrate that this question has an
affirmative answer.
     Suppose that, given a matrix of p self-equilibrated reactive modes Ψ , we manage to determine a matrix of
n ∗ = p effective straining modes Φ such that H = Φ T Ψ is invertible — we shall explain later, in Section 7.3,
how to ensure this condition. In doing so, both Eq. (60) and Eq. (59) can be solved for q e and r e , yielding
       q e = H −T T ae ,            e = 1, 2 . . . M,                                                                                    (62)
   9 Recall that the Lagrange multipliers are only nonzero at the DOFs of interface boundaries, while the displacement domains are non-zero
at all DOFs. Accordingly, it may occur that certain strain modes only affect the interior of the domain, being its impact on interface boundary
DOFS — and therefore on the coarse-scale — negligible.
                           J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                       17

and
                      ∑
        r e = H −1            B ∗T(xg )ω(xg )σ e (xg ) − H −1 Φ T Fsee ,             e = 1, 2 . . . M,                                   (63)
                       g∈Z

respectively. If we now substitute Eq. (62) into the strain downscaling expression (18), we obtain
        εe (xg ) = B(xg )ae ,               e = 1, 2 . . . M,                                                                            (64)
where
        B(xg ) := B ∗ (xg )H −T T ,                  g = 1, 2 . . . m gs .                                                               (65)
The above matrix will be referred to as the interscale “B” matrix at Gauss point xg , for it allows one to determine
the fine-scale strain vector in terms of the coarse-scale DOFs of the domain. On the other hand, inserting Eq. (63)
into the coarse-scale equilibrium equation (56), we arrive at
        M                                                             M                              M
        ∑        T              ∑                                     ∑       T                      ∑       T         ∑        T
              Le T T H −1             B ∗T(xg )ω(xg )σ e (xg ) =            Le T T H −1 Φ T Fsee +         Le Feqe +          L̄ I F̄I   (66)
        e=1                     g∈Z                                   e=1                            e=1               I ∈b

Using Eq. (65), the preceding equation can be recast into a format reminiscent of that of typical finite element
formulations:
         Internal forces              Body forces
                                 Boundary forces
         M            M                    ∑  
        ∑    T        ∑   T                       T
           Le Fi nt
                 e
                    =   Le (Fse
                              e
                                + Feqe ) +     L̄ I F̄I                                                                                  (67)
        e=1                     e=1                            I ∈b

where
                   ∑
           e
        Fi nt :=           B T(xg )ω(xg )σ e (xg )                                                                                       (68)
                     g∈Z

and
         e
        Fse := (T T H −1 Φ T )Fsee                                                                                                       (69)
(Feqe was defined in Eq. (58)).

6.2. The coarse-scale finite element

   Eqs. (64) and (67) are of crucial importance in the proposed method. By simply enforcing that H = Φ T Ψ
be invertible, we have managed to couch the kinematics and the equilibrium of the coarse-scale problem solely
in terms of the infinitesimal strain vector εe (xg ), the Cauchy stress vector σ e (xg ) (both at the ECM integration
points, g ∈ Z) and the vector of coarse-scale DOFs. Furthermore, both Eqs. (64) and (67) have practically the same
format as those of standard finite element formulations. Thus, for implementational purposes, it proves useful to
exploit this resemblance and conceptualize the unit cell as a special type of finite element. The main features of
this coarse-scale element are summarized below.

      1. The nodes are located at the centroids of the l interface boundaries.
      2. The integration points of this finite element are located at the positions computed by the Empirical Cubature
         Method {xg ∈ Ω̄ }g∈Z .
      3. The B-matrices relating the strains at the ECM integration points to the element DOFs are given in Eq. (65).
         There is one of such matrices for each coarse-scale node, that is,
               B = B 1 B 2 · · · Bl ,
                    [                    ]
                                                                                                                  (70)
        where, according to Eq. (52).a:
                Bi (xg ) = B ∗ (xg )H −T (Ψ Tf i Qi Vi ).                                                                                (71)
18                   J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

     4. The element internal force vector (see Eq. (68)) is obtained as in a standard FE formulation, i.e., by summing
        the internal forces per unit volume (B T σ e ) at all the integration points. In this case, however, the volumetric
        weights are not the Gauss weights times the Jacobian, but the weights computed by the ECM (ω(xg ), g ∈ Z).
        The global internal force vector Fi nt is computed by standard FE assembly operations (using the coarse-scale
        connectivity array T (·, ·)).
     5. The element tangent stiffness matrix also exhibits the same format as that of FE formulations. Indeed,
        linearization of Eq. (68) yields
                       e
               D∆ae Fi nt = Ke ∆ae                                                                                                (72)
        where
                       ∑
               Ke :=          ω(xg )B T(xg )C e (xg )B(xg )                                                                       (73)
                        g∈Z

        (here C e (xg ) stands for the algorithmic tangent modulus at integration point xg ). In linear problems, Ke does
        not change and therefore, it may be directly pre-computed (without recourse to reduced-order integration)
        from the fine-scale element stiffness matrix K e by the following expression
               Ke = (T T H −1 Φ T )K e (Φ H −T T ).                                                                               (74)
     6. The element body force vector10 Fbe (first term of the right-hand side of Eq. (67)) comprises two terms, Feqe ,
                                   e
        defined in Eq. (58), and Fse , defined in Eq. (69). In Appendix B, we show that these body coarse-scale force
        admits also a format which resembles that of external force vector in standard finite element formulations.
        Indeed, by assuming that the only body force per unit volume is self-weight, and that the non-interface
        boundary ∂ Ω̄ non is subdivided into bnon portions upon which the applied tractions are constant, it can be
        demonstrated that (see Eq. (143) in Appendix B) the coarse-scale body force at Ω e becomes expressible as
                       n∑
                        mat                        bnon
                                 T        eT       ∑           g T ′e(g)
               Fbe =          N k (ρ k Q̂ g) +            N̄      t        .                                                      (75)
                       k=1                         g=1

        Here, ρ k denotes the density of the kth material of the unit cell (k = 1, 2 . . . n mat ), g ∈ Rn sd is the vector
        of acceleration of gravity (in global coordinates) and t ′e(g) stands for the traction vector (in local, surface
        coordinates) acting on the gth portion of ∂Ωnone
                                                          (g = 1, 2 . . . bnon ). The expressions for the reduced-order
                    k        g
        matrices N and N̄ , on the other hand, are given in Eqs. (141) and (142), respectively. Such matrices
        depend only on the geometry and basis modes of the unit cell, and hence they can be precomputed in the
        offline phase. To adapt an existing finite element code to compute Fbe , one would just need to replace the
        standard polynomial shape functions by these matrices.

6.2.1. Dirichlet boundary conditions
      In Section 4.3, we saw that each coarse-scale node possesses translational ( ā t I ), rotational ( ā r I ) and straining
( â I ) DOFs (I ∈ b is the global index of the coarse-scale node). If there are no straining DOFs, then imposing
Dirichlet boundary conditions is as simple as specifying the prescribed rigid-body DOFs of each node — as it is
done in FE beam and shell formulations. For instance, a “fixed node” corresponds to a node in which ā t I = 0 and
ā r I = 0, whereas a “hinged node” is that in which ā t I = 0 and ā r I is unknown.
      When straining DOFs come into play, things become a little bit more complicated. Such straining modes are
empirically determined and therefore have no apparent physical interpretation. The easiest route is to set them to
zero ( â I = 0) when the node is fixed or with prescribed rigid-body motions, or include them in the set of unknowns
when the node is unrestricted. If the input nodal displacements, designated by ū I , are given, then one can compute
the DOFs by solving the minimization problem mina I ∥VI a I − ū I ∥ M̄I ; this gives
       a I = (VIT M̄I VI )−1 VIT M̄I ū I .                                                                                       (76)
The most general case is when the boundary condition is of the general affine type A I VI a I = ū I , where A I is
some matrix with at least as many columns as rows. This formulation covers, for instance, the case of supports in
 10 We call it “body force vector” because it arises from upscaling those nodal forces not applied on the interface boundaries.
                       J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192        19

which the interface is free to move in one plane, but is restricted in the other direction. To incorporate this type of
boundary conditions, we proceed by finding a full-rank block matrix of V ∗I = A I VI . Denoting by V ∗I r this block
matrix, we can write the boundary condition as
      V ∗I r a I r = ū I − V ∗I m a I m .                                                                            (77)
We refer to a I r and a I m as the slave and master DOFs, respectively, of the (coarse-scale) node I . Next we express
the slave DOFs as an affine function of the master DOFs by solving the corresponding minimization problem; this
yields
                                v̄ I                                    −JI
                                                                                     
      a I r = (V I r M̄ I r V I r ) V I r M̄ I r ū I − (V I r M̄ V I r ) V I r M̄ I r V ∗I m a I m .
                 ∗T           ∗ −1 ∗T                      ∗T       ∗ −1 ∗T
                                                                                                                      (78)
Gathering the equations for all the boundary nodes, we can express the boundary condition in a compact fashion
as
      ar = v̄ + J am                                                                                                  (79)
The unknown DOFs in the problem are therefore al = [amT , a Tf ]T , a f being the remaining DOFs.

6.3. Solvability requirements

   The matrices of straining modes Φ, self-equilibrating reactive modes Ψ and interface modes V cannot be chosen
independently from each other, guided only by accuracy considerations. As in any other multifield variational
problem, such matrices have to observe certain conditions that guarantee the well-posedness of the overall problem.
One of such conditions have been already stated — the invertibility of H = Φ T Ψ . The remaining conditions pose
constraints in the number and form of the interface modes V. In what follows, we list these additional conditions,
along with other well-posedness considerations. Later on, in Sections 7.3 and 7.4, we shall discuss how to guarantee
that these conditions are met when determining the basis matrices from the FE “training” data.

6.3.1. Rigid-body condition                                                                               [       ]
   We postulated in Eq. (32) that each fictitious interface possesses rigid-body and straining modes (Vi = V̄i V̂i ).
The rigid body modes must be included because otherwise the coarse-scale model would not be able to exactly
represent rigid-body motions without straining. Thus, we can write that

        i ≥ nr b ,
      n int                     i = 1, 2 . . . l                                                                      (80)
where n inti   denotes the number of columns of Vi . The number of interface straining modes, denoted hereafter by
n̂ int
   i   = n int
           i   − n r b , depends on the geometry of the unit cell and the “training” cases used for constructing the modes.
In many cases n̂ int  i = 0 (i = 1, 2 . . . l), meaning that the only coarse-scale DOFs are the amplitude of the rigid-body
modes.

6.3.2. Interface work conditions
   Suppose that we constrain the displacement of, at least, one of the fictitious interfaces of a given domain Ω e . In
such a case, the coarse-scale strain–displacement relation (62) boils down to q e = H −T T L aeL , where the subscript
L refers to the remaining coarse-scale DOFs. Since rigid-body motions are prevented, the domain must necessarily
undergo straining (i.e., q e ̸= 0), which requires that ker(H −T T L ) = {0}, and this in turn translates into
      ker(T L ) = {0}                                                                                                 (81)
that is, the kernel of the block matrix T L must be zero. This condition guarantees the invertibility of the coarse-scale
stiffness matrix KeL L , and therefore, the solvability of the coarse-scale problem (this follows from Eq. (74)).
    Finally, let us examine the physical interpretation of this solvability requirement. For the sake of argument,
suppose that in this case we restrict the displacements of all interfaces but one (aie ̸= 0), so that now the condition
20                      J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

is ker(T i ) = {0}. By virtue of the dimension theorem,11 and using the definition of T , see Eq. (52).a, it follows
that
       n int
         i ≤ p                                                                                                                         (82)
and
                                                                              n int
                                                                                i
                              [                                 ]      
       rank(Ψf′Ti Vi ) = rank( Ψf′Ti V̄i               Ψf′Ti V̂i ) = n r b + n̂ int
                                                                                i                                                      (83)

where12 Ψf′i := QiT Ψ f i . Physically, the preceding condition is telling us that both rigid-body modes V̄i and straining
body modes V̂i (if any) must contribute to the work done by the reactive nodal forces Ψf′i . This condition, thus,
provides a useful criterion for discriminating which straining modes should be incorporated into the set of interface
modes (we shall explain this in Section 7.3). Interestingly, it also gives us hints on which type of FE “training”
tests should be conducted to construct Ψ . Indeed, for Eq. (83) to hold, it is necessary that rank(Ψf′Ti V̄i ) = n r b .
For a 3D problem, for instance, this means that
                     Axial                  Shear                  Torsion                  Bending
                                                                                                
       rank([Ψf′Ti ( V̄i )1 , Ψf′Ti ( V̄i )2 , Ψf′Ti ( V̄i )3 , Ψf′Ti ( V̄i )4 , Ψf′Ti ( V̄i )5 , Ψf′Ti ( V̄i )6 ]) = 6.               (84)
The preceding expression indicates that the FE “training” tests should be designed so that, at the very least, the
self-equilibrated modes at each interface i = 1, 2 . . . l have components in tension/compression, bending, shear and
torsion. In doing so, one ensures that the coarse-scale model is able to transmit across any interface boundary
the resultants and moment resultants of the external forces . In turn, this implies that the minimum number of
straining/reactive modes in 1D, 2D and 3D periodicity is p = 6, 12 and 18, respectively.

7. Offline stage
   As is customary in reduced-order modeling, the solution procedure is split into two distinct steps — known
as the offline and online stages. In the offline stage, the basis matrices and reduced-order operators required for
constructing the coarse-scale equations are computed. Such computations have to be performed just once, and its
outcome may be reused in subsequent analyses. In the case at hand, the information required for constructing the
coarse-scale problem depends, on the one hand, on a set of geometric matrices, such as the matrix of rigid body
modes R, and on the other hand, on three empirical matrices, namely: the matrix of straining modes Φ, the matrix of
self-equilibrated modes Ψ and the matrix of stress modes Λ. The qualifier empirical here means that such matrices
are determined from the outcome of FE simulations (i.e., from computational experiments).

7.1. FE “training” tests

    The need for such computational experiments (the FE training tests) is common to other multiscale methods
such as the FE-HROM. However, there is a notable difference between the approach followed in such methods
and the one employed here. For instance, in the FE-HROM in the small strains regime, the deformational modes
are obtained by analyzing the equilibrium of a single unit cell under appropriate periodic boundary conditions; the
infinitesimal strain tensor (at the coarse scale) plays the role of input parameters in this equilibrium problem. In our
multiscale approach, we cannot follow this approach of training with just one unit cell simply because we do not
know a priori which are the coarse-scale strains. Of course we may contrive sophisticated simplifying assumptions
and tailor consistent periodic boundary conditions to each specific case.13 However, this approach is at odds with
the very spirit of the proposed methodology, in which the simplifications leading to the coarse-scale model are
presumed to be automatically discovered by the dimensionality reduction algorithms. The most general approach
 11 The dimension theorem states that dim ker(T ) + rank(T ) = ncol(T ), consult for instance [20].
                                                          i              i              i
 12 Ψ ′   is the matrix of reactive modes on interface boundary f i expressed in the reference system attached to interface. We use this
      fi
variable instead of Ψ f i to avoid the nuisance of explicitly writing the global rotation matrix Qi .
 13 We have explored this possibility in the case of 1D periodicity, but results are only satisfactory for certain types of geometries in the
elastic range.
                   J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192        21

is, thus, to conduct FE training analyses of arrangements of several unit cells. This way, we allow the method to
extract the most prominent patterns of collective behavior, without assuming any kinematic simplification at the
outset.
    The number of unit cells of the training structures depends on the purpose and scope of the reduced-order model.
The only consideration to keep in mind is that, at the very least, the corresponding reactive modes should have
component in tension/compression, shear/bending and torsion, as deduced in Eq. (84). This suggests to perform,
as a rule, at least 4 training tests (for 3D problems) for each periodicity direction (1 for axial behavior, 2 for
shear/bending, and 1 for torsion).

7.1.1. Snapshot matrices
   Suppose we run, following the guidelines described above, a battery of FE training tests. The information of the
displacements of each unit cell, the corresponding reaction forces between domains, and the stresses (all in domain
coordinates) is to be stored in three distinct snapshot matrices, namely, the matrix of displacements:
      Ad = d(µ1 ) d(µ2 ) · · · d(µ P ) ;
            [                              ]
                                                                                                               (85)
the matrix of reactions (for only the entries f corresponding to the interface boundary nodes)
     Aλ = λ f (µ1 ) λ f (µ2 ) · · · λ f (µ P ) ;
            [                                 ]
                                                                                                                  (86)
and the matrix of stresses
      Aσ = S(µ1 ) S(µ2 ) · · ·            S(µ P ) .
           [                                     ]
                                                                                                                  (87)
Here µ denotes collectively the set of input parameters of the problem, which may encompass the location within
the structure, the employed boundary conditions, the pseudo-time (in nonlinear problems), and/or the variations of
material properties, among others. The total number of snapshots is denoted by P. On the other hand, S is a vector
formed by stacking the Cauchy stress vector at all Gauss points of a given domain.
   Recall (see Eq. (16).b and Eq. (21).a) that we are only interested in the straining and self-equilibrated part of Ad
and Aλ , respectively; thus, we have to purge the rigid-body and resultant components, respectively, of each column
of such matrices:
      Ad ← Ad − R(R T M R)−1 (R T MAd )                                                                           (88)
      Aλ ← Aλ − R f (R Tf R f )−1 (R Tf Aλ ).                                                                     (89)
The stress snapshot matrix in Eq. (87), on the other hand, is needed for constructing the objective function of the
minimization problem associated to the choice of the ECM points (see Eq. (123) in Appendix A).

7.2. Self-equilibrating reactive modes

  To determine Ψ f from Aλ , we employ the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). The truncated SVD of a matrix
A ∈ Rn×m is symbolically represented here as the function
      [U, S, W ] = SVD( A, ϵ),                                                                                    (90)
which takes the matrix A and the relative tolerance 0 ≤ ϵ ≤ 1 as arguments, and returns the matrix of left singular
vectors U ∈ Rn×r , the (diagonal) matrix of positive singular values S ∈ Rr ×r and the matrix of right singular
vectors W ∈ Rm×r . These matrices meet the following relationships
      A = U SW T + E,           ∥E∥ F ≤ ϵ∥ A∥ F ,     U T U = W T W = I r ×r ,       S(i+1,i+1) ≥ S(i,i) > 0,     (91)
where ∥E∥ F denotes the Frobenius norm of the truncation error.
  Applied to the matrix Aλ , using a tolerance ϵλ (typically around 10−3 ), the function SVD furnishes the desired
matrix of self-equilibrated modes:
      [Ψ f , Σ λ , •] = SVD(Aλf , ϵλ ).                                                                           (92)
  If the matrix is divided into blocks, one can use the partitioned version of the SVD proposed by the author in
Ref. [16]. This partitioned version allows one to specify a distinct tolerance for each submatrix.
22                  J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192


Algorithm 1: Algorithm for maximizing the alignment between subspaces
1    Function C =ALIG ( A, B) :
        Data: A ∈ Rn×r , B ∈ Rn× p , r ≥ p
        Result: C = Ah ∈ Rn× p , where h = arg min ∥B − Ac∥2F subject to h T h = I
                                                        c
2       [u, s, v] = SVD( AT B)
3       C = A(uv T )



7.3. Straining modes

  Having determined Ψ ∈ Rn do f × p , the next step is to compute the corresponding matrix Φ ∈ Rn do f × p of straining
modes. The simplest route would be to apply the SVD on Ad
       [Ū, •, •] = SVD(Ad , ϵd )                                                                                 (93)
(with a tolerance ϵd significantly smaller than ϵλ ), and then make Φ = Ū(:, 1 : p), that is, take Φ as the
matrix formed by the p leading left singular vectors of Ad . However, this procedure does not guarantee one of
the solvability requirements in our approach, namely, that H = Φ Tf Ψ f must be nonsingular (see Section 6.1). It
becomes necessary, thus, to develop a strategy that explicitly takes into consideration this condition.

7.3.1. Alignment of subspaces
   Let us begin by assuming that the p columns of the desired basis matrix are a linear combination of the r columns
(r > p) of Ū (computed from the SVD (93)), and let us denote by c the coefficient matrix in this linear combination.
The problem can be rephrased, thus, as that of finding a matrix c ∈ Rr × p such that (Ū f c)T Ψ f is non-singular. As
pointed out earlier, this matrix represents the work done by the reactive modes Ψ f when the interface boundary
nodes move along the displacement patterns dictated by Ū f c. It appears reasonable, therefore, to enforce that the
matrix is nonsingular by, loosely speaking, incorporating straining modes that contribute “as much as possible”
to the interface boundary work. Intuitively, if we think of Ū f c and Ψ f as vectors of displacements and forces,
respectively, in a high-dimensional space, then maximizing the work (in absolute value) is equivalent to make Ū f c
“as aligned as possible” to Ψ f . This intuitive idea can be shaped into a more rigorous form by appealing to the
notion of rotation of subspaces (cf. Golub et al. [21]). In particular, the problem at hand can be posed as follows:
find c ∈ Rr × p such that
       min ∥Ψ f − Ū f c∥2F                                                                                       (94)
         c

subject to cT c = I. The solution of this constrained minimization problem can be readily obtained as
       c = uv T                                                                                                   (95)
where
                           T
       [u, •, v] = SVD(Ū f Ψ f ).                                                                                (96)
(When the second argument of the function SVD() is omitted, it is tacitly assumed that the tolerance is equal to the
machine epsilon). For later purposes, this operation of maximizing the alignment between two subspaces will be
compactly represented by the function ALIG(•, •), described in Algorithm 1.
   According to condition (16).a, the desired basis matrix Φ is to be columnwise orthogonal; hence, a last step is
required to turn Ū c orthogonal:
       [Φ, •, •] = SVD(Ū c).                                                                                     (97)

7.4. Interface modes

   Now we come to grips with arguably the most critical and challenging part of the offline stage: the determination
of the interface modes. More specifically, since rigid body modes are to be invariably included, the task boils down
to determine the straining modes V̂i (i = 1, 2 . . . l) of each fictitious interfaces. The conditions that these modes
have to satisfy, discussed in previous Sections, are summarized below.
                      J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                      23


Algorithm 2: Weighted (truncated) Singular Value decomposition
 1 Function [U, S, V ] =WSVD( A, M, T O L):
      Data: A ∈ Rn×m , M ∈ Rn×n (positive definite), tolerance 0 ≤ T O L ≤ 1
      Result: U ∈ Rn×r , S ∈ Rr ×r , V ∈ Rm×r (r ≤ min(n, m)), with U T MU = V T V = I r ×r ,
               S(i+1,i+1) ≥ S(i,i) > 0, such that A = U SW T + E, ∥E∥ M ≤ ϵ∥ A∥ M
 2    M̄ =chol(M) // Cholesky decomposition of M
 3    A ← M̄ A
 4    [Ū, S, V ] = SVD( A,TOL) // Thin SVD of A.
                 −1
 5      U = M̄        Ū



     1. Orthogonality conditions (see Eq. (35))
                 T                              T
               V̂i M̄i V̂i = I,             V̂i M̄i V̄i = 0,   i = 1, 2 . . . l                                                    (98)
     2. Periodicity
                 +             −
               V̂i = V̂i               i = 1, 2 . . . l/2                                                                          (99)
     3. Interface work conditions (Eq. (81))
               ker(T L ) = {0}                                                                                                   (100)
       where T = Ψf′T V. The subscript L refers to the set of unconstrained coarse-scale DOFs of the unit cell.
       Condition Eq. (100) must hold for all L such that, at least, one of the interfaces is prevented to move (by
       constraining all its nodal DOFs).

7.4.1. Candidate modes
   Let us consider a given pair of periodic interfaces ∂ Ω̄i+ and ∂ Ω̄i− (i = 1, 2 . . . l/2), and let us construct the
matrix containing the entries of the (domain) straining modes at the nodes of the concerned interface boundaries
(in the local reference system attached to the interfaces):
       C i = [Φf′+ , Φf′− ]                                                                                                      (101)
                  i        i

where Φf′i := QiT Φ fi . Next we make the above matrix M-orthogonal to the rigid body modes, as required by
Eq. (35).b:
                                   T          T
       C i ← C i − V̄i ( V̄i M̄i V̄i )−1 V̄i M̄i C i .                                                                           (102)
Finally, to turn C i columnwise M-orthogonal, as specified by Eq. (35).b, we employ the weighted SVD described
in Algorithm14 2:
       [C̄ i , •, •] = WSVD(C i , M̄i , ϵc ).                                                                                    (103)
To filter out irrelevant, noisy modes, we set ϵc ∼ 10−6 . With C̄ i at hand, we can state that
       span(Vi ) ⊆ span([ V̄i , C̄ i ])                                                                                          (104)
that is, the column space of the desired basis matrix Vi lies on the column space of the matrix containing C̄ i and
the rigid-body matrix V̄i . We call C̄ i the matrix of candidate interface modes of the ith fictitious interface. The
remainder of this section is devoted to examine which of these candidate modes is to be incorporated to the set
of interface modes. The guiding criterion is the stability condition (100). We begin by studying the stability at the
level of two interacting interfaces; this will provide sufficient solvability conditions for 1D periodicity. Next, in
Section 7.4.3, we shall address the more general case of 2D and 3D periodicity.
 14 In essence, it is similar to the standard SVD, except for the fact that the underlying minimization problem is posed in terms of the
norm induced by a positive definite matrix M.
24                  J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

7.4.2. Solvability condition for each pair of interfaces
   Particularization of the solvability requirement (100) for the cases in which all interfaces are fixed except for
either ∂ Ω̄i+ or ∂ Ω̄i− yields the conditions
      ker(Ψf′T+ Vi ) = {0},           and      ker(Ψf′T− Vi ) = {0}.                                                   (105)
              i                                        i

These two conditions are formally identical to that discussed in Section 7.3, a fact that suggests that we may
follow the “subspace alignment recipe” for determining Vi . However, there are two additional difficulties now.
Firstly, we do not know yet how many interface modes (n int       i ) are to be included; and secondly, in general
span(Ψf′T+ ) ̸= span(Ψf′T− ) (both subspaces are only equal in 1D periodic problems when the training is made
         i                i
under strict periodicity conditions), and therefore, if we find one Vi such that Eq. (105).a is satisfied, this does not
imply that Eq. (105).b holds.
   The key to resolve this double conundrum lies in the notion of intersection of subspaces. Suppose we calculate
a matrix D such that its column space is the intersection of the column spaces of Ψf′+ and Ψf′− :
                                                                                                i         i

      span( D) = span(Ψf′+ ) ∩ span(Ψf′− ).                                                                            (106)
                         i             i

With D at one’s disposal, conditions in (105).a and (105).b can be replaced by a single requirement:
      ker( D T Vi ) = {0}.                                                                                             (107)
It follows from the preceding condition that the number of interface modes n int
                                                                              i cannot be greater than the dimension
of the intersection space (number of columns of D). As a rule, we shall take n inti = ncol( D). Appealing again to
the reasoning used in Section 7.3.1, the problem can be thus phrased as that of finding a matrix U with ncol( D)
columns such that, on the one hand, span(U) ⊆ span([ V̄i , C̄ i ]) and, on the other hand, span(U) is “as aligned as
possible” to the intersection subspace span( D):
      U = ALIG( D, [ V̄i , C̄ i ]).                                                                                    (108)


Algorithm 3: Straining modes of interfaces ∂ Ω̄i+ and ∂ Ω̄i−
1 Function [ V̂ , C̄] =STRMODP(Ψ + , Ψ − ,Φ + ,Φ − , V̄ , M̄,T O L ang ):
     Data: Ψ + , Ψ − ∈ Rn× p (domain reaction modes at the nodes of the two periodic boundary interfaces),
           Φ + , Φ − ∈ Rn× p (corresponding domain straining modes), V̄ ∈ Rn×nr b (rigid-body matrix of the
           interface), M̄ ∈ Rn×n (geometric mass matrix of the interface), 0 ≤ T O L ≤ 90 (angle tolerance for
           the intersection subspace, in degrees)
     Result: V̂ ∈ Rn×m (0 ≤ m ≤ p − n r b ): Matrix of straining interface modes. C̄ ∈ Rn×m , matrix of
             candidate for straining interface modes (span( V̂ ) ⊆ span( C̄))
2    C̄ ← [Φ + , Φ − ] // Matrix of candidate interface modes (initialization)
                          T            T
3      C̄ ← C̄ − V̄ ( V̄ M̄ V̄ )−1 V̄ M̄ C̄ // Make C̄ M-orthogonal to rigid-body modes
4      [ C̄, •, •] ← WSVD( C̄, M̄ , T O L c ) // Make C̄ columnwise M-orthogonal, T O L c ∼ 10−6
5      D ← INTS (Ψ + , Ψ − , I, T O L ang ) // Basis matrix for span(Ψ + ) ∩ span(Ψ − ), see Algorithm 4
6      U ← ALIG ( D, [ V̄ , C̄]) . // Alignment of subspaces, see Algorithm 1
7      V̂ ← INTS (U, C̄, M̄ , T O L int ) // Basis matrix for span(U) ∩ span(C̄), T O L int ∼ 10−3 , see Algorithm 4


   Physically, span(U) is the subspace of span([ V̄i , C̄ i ]) that contributes the most to the work done by the reactive
modes whose patterns are identical in both ∂ Ω̄i+ and ∂ Ω̄i− —somehow, thus, in proceeding this way, we are imposing
periodicity in terms of reactive forces. Once U is at our disposal, we have to calculate the intersection between the
column space of U and C̄ i (in order to determine which is the straining component of the subspace):
      span( V̂i ) = span(U) ∩ span(C̄ i ).                                                                             (109)
It should be noted that V̂i will be non-empty only if ncol( D) > n r b . If ncol( D) = n r b , the interfaces will have
only rigid-body DOFs. The case ncol( D) < n r b , on the other hand, evidences a deficient training set — in the
sense that condition (84) is not observed.
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192      25

   The above described steps for determining the straining modes of each pair of periodic interfaces are synthesized
in function
      [ V̂i , C̄ i ] = STRMODP(Ψf′+ , Ψf′− , Φf′+ , Φf′− , V̄i , M̄i , ϵrint ),                                  (110)
                                     i      i     i      i

outlined in Algorithm 3. Line 5 in this Algorithm corresponds to the computation of the intersection subspace of
Eq. (106), which is in turn carried out following the steps summarized in Algorithm 4. Such computations are
based on the concept of principal angles between two subspaces (cf. Ref. [21]). Strictly speaking, the dimension
of the intersection is equal to the number of principal angles (calculated in line 8 of Algorithm 4) equal to zero.
However, we relax this condition and define the intersection in a weaker sense, by selecting those principal vectors
whose associated angles are below a specified tolerance ϵrint (the last input argument of function STRMODP()). In
the examples shown later we have set ϵrint = 1 degree.

Algorithm 4: Intersection of subspaces
1   Function U =INTS( A, B, M, θtol ):
       Data: Matrices A ∈ Rn×m , B ∈ Rn× p , M ∈ Rn×n (positive definite). Maximum angle (degr.)
                0 ≤ θtol ≤ 90
       Result: U ∈ Rn×r , r ≤ min(m, p), with U T MU = I and span(U) = span( A) ∩ span(B)
  2    if M ̸= I then M ←chol(M) // Cholesky decomposition of M
 43    A ← M A;           B ← MB
  5    [Y A , ·, ·] ← SVD( A) // Thin SVD of A. Y A is the matrix of left singular vectors
  6    [Y B , ·, ·] ← SVD(B)
  7    [Z, S, ·] ← SVD(Y TA Y B ) // S is a vector containing the singular values.
  8    θi ← acosd(Si ) (i = 1, 2 . . . length (S)) // Principal angles, in degrees
  9    Find s such that θs > θtol . Set r ← s − 1
10     U ← M −1 Y A Z(:, 1 : r ) // Z(:, 1 : r ) is the block matrix of Z formed by columns 1, 2 . . . r


7.4.3. General solvability conditions for 2D and 3D periodicity
   The procedure described in the foregoing (summarized in Algorithm 3) provides a set of straining modes that
meet the necessary conditions stated in Eq. (105), in which all the interfaces of the unit cell but one are assumed
to be fixed. For the case of 1D periodicity, these conditions are sufficient to ensure the solvability of the problem.
However, for 2D and 3D periodicity, there is no guarantee that these straining modes furnish a stable solution.
The reason is that these modes have been obtained without accounting for possible interrelations between the
motion of contiguous interface boundaries, as demanded by condition (100). The criterion for checking whether
such interrelations exist reads
      l
      ∑
        (n r b + n̂ int
                    i ) ≤ n r b + p.                                                                             (111)
      i=1

If this condition is not satisfied, that is, if the total number of modes of the fictitious interfaces (left-hand side)
exceeds the total number of modes of the unit cell (right-hand side), it means that there are straining modes that
are interrelated and, thus, the problem may become ill-posed. In what follows, we propose a method for dealing
with such situations.
   The method is based on a reformulation of the stability condition (100). Now, rather than prescribing all the
nodal displacements of one of the interfaces, we set to zero the amplitudes of its rigid body modes, allowing the
interface to freely strain. To put it alternatively, the subscript L in (100) (reprinted below)
      ker(Ψf′T VL ) = {0},                                                                                       (112)
refers now to the indexes of all the coarse-scale DOFs except for the n r b rigid body DOFs of any of the fictitious
interfaces. The resulting condition is more stringent (it is sufficient, but not necessary for solvability purposes),
but facilitates the determination of the interface straining modes. Indeed, this expression bears a close resemblance
26                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

to the condition observed by the straining modes of the domain (see Eq. (26)). For convenience, we reprint this
equation below:
      ker(Ψ Tf Φ f ) = ker(Ψf′T Φf′ ) = {0}.                                                                                      (113)
This resemblance suggests that, since the domain straining modes Φf′ already fulfills the preceding domain stability
condition, all we have to do is to determine V such that V L can reproduce as close as possible any straining
displacement of the interface boundaries (any linear combination of Φf′ ). In doing so, the interface condition (112)
will be automatically observed. We describe in what follows a heuristic procedure for achieving such a goal.
   Let us begin by considering the matrix
      S = Rf′ Φf′
           [       ]
                                                                                                            (114)
where Rf′i := QiT R f i , i = 1, 2 . . . l. The column space of this matrix represents the set of all possible displacements
of the interface boundaries of the unit cell (expressed in the local reference system of each interface). On the other
hand, the column space of the matrix
      U = diag ([ V̄1 , C̄ 1 ], [ V̄2 , C̄ 2 ], · · · , [ V̄l , C̄ l ])                                                           (115)
represents the set of all possible configurations of the fictitious interfaces — as a function of the candidate straining
modes C̄ i , computed by means of function STRMODP() in (110). On average, each fictitious interface has p candidate
straining modes, so the total number of independent configurations is ncol(U) ∼ l(n r b + p), a figure that largely
exceeds the number of possible configurations of the interface boundaries of the unit cell (ncol(S) = n r b + p).
The idea put forward above is that, in order to guarantee the solvability of the problem, the interface basis matrix
V can only include those columns of U that are, in the sense defined in what follows, kinematically compatible
with the modes of the unit cell (the columns of S). These kinematically compatible modes (a total of n r b + p)
may be selected from the columns of U by minimizing the gap between the fictitious interfaces and the interface
boundaries of the unit cell for any displacement of the latter. The underlying minimization problem is as follows:
find a ∈ Rnr b + p and I ⊆ {1, 2 . . . ncol(U)} such that
      {a, I} = arg            min          ∥Sq̄ − U Ī ā∥2M                                                                      (116)
                        Ī, ā∈Rnr b + p

for all q̄ ∈ Rnr b + p (here U Ī = U(:, Ī), that is, it is the block of U formed by the columns corresponding to indexes
Ī). This (discrete) minimization problem is subjected to two constraints. Firstly, I must include the indexes of the
rigid-body modes (as stated in Section 6.3.1); and, secondly, I must observe the periodicity conditions, in the sense
that there should be a disjoint partition I = I + ∪ I − such that the modes of15 U(:, I + ) are identical to that of
U(:, I − ).
    Problem (116) may be expressed in a different format, with a single unknown, by using the solution of the
unconstrained minimization problem. Assuming one takes all the columns of U, this solution reads a = D q̄, where
                                                  ]T
       D = D1T          D2T                 DlT        ,       Di = (U iT M̄ i U i )−1 U iT M̄ i [Rf′i , Φf′i ].
          [
                                  ···                                                                                             (117)
By construction, span(S) ⊆ span(U). Therefore, we can write S = U D, and cast Eq. (116) as
      I = arg        min         ∥U( D − PĪT PĪ D)∥ M                                                                           (118)
                  Ī∈Nnr b + p

where PĪ denotes the boolean “selection” operator associated to the entries Ī. Owing to both its discrete nature
and the presence of the periodicity constraints, problem (118) is a NP-hard optimization problem, and recourse to
sub-optimal solutions is to be made. Here we propose a “greedy” method that operates on the matrix D defined
in (117). The format of the objective function in problem (118) suggests that I may be selected so that, loosely
speaking, the resulting block matrix D(I, :) represents as much as possible the information contained in the original
matrix. In this light, the problem translates into that of selecting the set of maximally independent rows of D. This
problem is analogous to that addressed by discrete interpolation methods, the only difference being the existence of
the rigid-body and periodicity constraints. Accordingly, we have adapted one of such methods — more specifically,
the (Discrete) Empirical Interpolation Method [22,23], reproduced for convenience in Algorithm 6— to account for
the above mentioned constraints. The resulting scheme is shown in Algorithm 5. Once the set of indexes I have
been computed using this algorithm, the desired interface basis matrix is obtained by simply setting V = U(:, I).
 15 To fulfill this condition, the truncation of reactions modes in the SVD (92) is to be made such that p + n
                                                                                                                   r b is even.
                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                   27


Algorithm 5: Selection of kinematically compatible interface modes
1  Function I =KINEMDOF( D, I r b , I + , I − ):
      Data: Unconstrained minimization matrix D ∈ R2m×2 p (see Eq. (117)), where m > p, and
            rank( D) = 2 p. Rigid-body indexes I r b ⊂ {1, 2 . . . 2m}, length(I r b ) ≤ 2 p. Periodic indexes
            I + , I − , where I + ∪ I − = {1, 2 . . . 2m} (I + (k) is the periodic counterpart of I − (k), for
            k = 1, 2 . . . m).
      Result: I ⊂ {1, 2 . . . 2m}: set of 2 p linearly independent rows of D such that I r b ⊆ I and I = I + ∪ I −
 2    J ← DEIM( D(I r b , :)T ) // Apply DEIM (see Algorithm 6) to select J so that D(I r b , J ) is invertible
 3    L ← {1, 2 . . . 2 p} \ J ; A ← D(:, J ); I ← I r b ; I + ← I ∩ I + ; I − ← I ∩ I − // Initializations
 4    for j = 1 to length(L)/2 do
           // Approximate the next two columns of D(:, L) as an oblique projection onto D(:, J )
5          r ← 0 // Initialization residual
6          C + ← I + \ I + ; C − ← I − \ I − // Candidate indexes
7          for i = 1 to 2 do
8              k ← 2( j − 1) + i
9              s ← D(:, L(k)) − A A(I , :)−1 D(I , L(k)) // Residual (oblique projection)
10             r ← r + s ◦ s // s ◦ s is the Hadamard (element wise) product
11         end √
12         r← r
                 √
13         a ← r(C + ) ◦ r(C + ) + r(C − ) ◦ r(C − ) // Residual associated to each pair of faces
14         d ← arg max a(e) // Candidate index at which the residual is maximum
                        e
15        I + ← I + ∪ C + (d); I − ← I − ∪ C − (d); I ← I + ∪ I − ;
16     end


Algorithm 6: Discrete Empirical Interpolation Method
1 Function J =DEIM( A):
     Data: A ∈ Rm×n , m ≥ n, rank( A) = n.
     Result: J ⊂ {1, 2 . . . m}: subset of n maximally independent rows of A, such that A(J, :) is invertible.
2    U ← A(:, 1); J ← arg max |U(e)| // Initializations
                                    e
3      for k = 2 to n do
4          r ← A(:, k) − U U(J, :)−1 A(J, k) // Residual (oblique projection)
5          i ← arg max |r(e)| // New index
                       e
6            J ← J ∪i
7      end



7.5. Summary of offline operations

  For the reader’s convenience, we have summarized the set of operations to be carried out in the offline stage in
Box I.

8. Online stage: the coarse-scale problem

   Once the reduced-order matrices outlined in Box I have been computed, the solution of the non-linear coarse-scale
problem (the online stage) may be addressed like any standard nonlinear finite element problem. Consider a time
                                                        ⋃ Nst p
discretization of the interval of interest [t0 , t f ] = n=1    [tn , tn+1 ]. The initial data at a given time step t = tn includes
the coarse-scale DOFs vector an and the fine-scale stresses, strains and internal variables at the ECM integration
points of each coarse-scale element: {σ en (xg ), εen (xg ), ξ en (xg )}g∈Z (e = 1, 2 . . . M). On the other hand, the external
28                 J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192



       1. Geometric information of the unit cell. Compute and store in memory all the FE variables that solely
          depend on the geometry of the unit cell (and on its FE discretization). This includes, among others, the
          rigid body modes of the domain (R, see Eq. (15)), the strain–displacement matrix at each Gauss point
          (B(xg ), see Eq. (6)), the FE integration weights Wg (Eq. (8)), the geometric mass matrix M (Eq. (16)),
          the set of boundary DOFs f (Eq. (4)) and R̄ f = M f R f (Eq. (22)).
       2. Geometric information of the boundary interfaces. Compute the geometric mass matrices M̄i (Eq. (35)),
          relative rotation matrices Q i (see Section 2.1) and rigid body modes V̄i (Eq. (34)) (i = 1, 2 . . . l).
       3. Training stage. Run pertinent FE analyses following the guidelines given in Section 7.1. Store solutions
          in matrices Ad , Aλ and Aσ (see Eqs. (85), (86) and (87)). Determine the straining and self-equilibrating
          components of Ad and Aλ using Eqs. (88) and (89).
       4. Unit cell modes. Determine the basis matrix for self-equilibrating reactions Ψ using the truncated SVD
          on Aλ (see Expr. (92)). Using Ψ and Ad , compute the matrix of straining modes Φ following the
          “alignment” recipe described in Section 7.3.
                                                                                                  m gs
       5. Reduced set of integration points. Using as inputs the reduced B-matrices {B ∗ (x g )}g=1    (see Eq. (19)), the
                                           m gs
          FE volumetric weights {(Wg )}g=1      and the snapshot matrix of stresses Aσ , apply the Empirical Cubature
          Method, explained in Appendix A, to determine the subset of ECM integration points Z ⊂ {1, 2 . . . m gs },
          as well as their associated volumetric weights {ω(xg )}g∈Z .
       6. Straining interface modes. Use function STRMODP() in Expr. (110) to determine the (tentative) straining
          modes matrices V̂i for the fictitious interfaces (i = 1, 2 . . . l). For 2D and 3D periodicity, check whether
          inequality (111) holds. If not, compute matrix D in Eq. (117) and invoke function KINEMDOF() (described
          in Algorithm 5) to re-compute the basis matrices for the interfaces.
       7. Reduced-order matrices. For each ECM integration point, compute the interscale B-matrices defined
          in Eq. (65): {B(xg )}g∈Z . Likewise, for each distinct material, and for each non-interface boundary,
                            n mat                              g bnon
          determine {N k }k=1 (Eq. (141)) and {N̄ }g=1 (Eq. (142)), respectively.



                                                            Box I. Offline operations.



inputs at t = tn+1 comprise the prescribed displacements v̄ n+1 (c.f Eq. (79)), the tractions applied on non-interface
               ′e(k) bnon                                                                          n+1
boundaries {tn+1    }k=1 (e = 1, 2 . . . M), and the vector of coarse-scale boundary forces F̄I         (I = 1, 2 . . . N ). The
                                                                                           (k)
iterative procedure to update the solution is sketched in Box II. In step 8, K(k)
                                                                                ll and  R̄ l   refer to the block matrices of
the tangent stiffness matrix and residual, respectively, associated to the unknown DOFs l. If the boundary conditions
are affine, that is, if J ̸= 0 in Eq. (79), the expression for these matrices have to be modified as follows
              [               ]
                Kmm Km f
        Kll =                   ;     Kmm ← Kmm + ( J T Krm + Kmr J) + J T Krr J
                Kfm Kf f
                                                                                                                           (119)
                                                                              R̄m + J T R̄r
                                                                            [                 ]
                            T
        Km f ← Km f + J Kr f ;           K f m ← K f m + K f r J;    R̄l ←
                                                                                   R̄ f

   It should be remarked that all the involved operations, as well as the input and output variables, are of reduced
size (independent of the size of the FE discretization of the unit cell). Nevertheless, for post-processing purposes,
one can reconstruct the fine-scale displacement and stresses at any time step of the analysis. Displacements can be
recovered using Eq. (14). Recovery of stresses, on the other hand, can be carried out by a least-square fitting (see
e.g., [16]):
      σ e (xg ) = R(xg )SeZ ,       g = 1, 2 . . . m gs ,                                                                  (120)
                T            T                 T
where SeZ = [σ e (xZ 1 ), σ e (xZ 2 ) . . . σ e (xZ m ∗gs )]T ; and R(xg ) = Λ xg (ΛZT ΛZ )−1 ΛZT (stress reconstruction operator
at Gauss point xg ). Needless to say, one need not perform the reconstruction for all domains. Rather, stresses and/or
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                      29


                                                         bnon
                                                       ′e(k)                                n+1
  Given an , v̄ n+1 , {σ en , εen , ξ en }(xg )g∈Z , {tn+1   }k=1 (e = 1, 2 . . . M), F̄I         (I = 1, 2 . . . N ).
                                            (k)              (k)         (k) T          T         T
                                 m = a m , a f = a f . Set a l = [a m , a f ] .
                                                  n
      1. Initialization. k = 0, a(k)   n                            (k)
                                                                                                  T     T
      2. Slave DOFs: a(k)
                       r = v̄
                              n+1
                                  + J a(k)
                                       m (cf. Eq. (79)). Set a
                                                               (k)
                                                                   = [ar(k) , al(k) ]T
      3. For each coarse-scale element e = 1, 2 . . . M, compute
              (a) Strains: εe(k) (xg ) = B(xg )ae(k) , g ∈ Z, where ae(k) = Le a(k) .
              (b) Stresses, algorithmic tangent moduli and internal variables (via constitutive Eq. (7)):
                        {σ e(k) , C e(k) , ξ e(k) }(xg )g∈Z = H {εe(k) , σ en , ξ en }(xg )g∈Z
                                                                  (                            )

                                                            e(k)
                                                                 := g∈Z B T(xg )ω(xg )σ(k)       e
                                                                    ∑
              (c) Internal forces (Eq. (68)): Fi nt                                                (xg )
                                                                                         T         e T   ∑ non g T ′e(g)
                                                                             n mat
              (d) Body forces (if k = 0, Eq. (75)): Fbe = i=1                        N i (ρ i Q̂ g) + bg=1
                                                                         ∑
                                                                                                              N̄ tn+1 .
                                            e(k)
           (e) Residual forces: Re(k) = Fi nt    − Fbe
           (f) Tangent stiffness matrix (Eq. (73)): Ke(k) = g∈Z ω(xg )B T(xg )C e(k) (xg )B(xg )
                                                            ∑

                                                                  ∑M     T
      4. Assemble the vector of element residual forces: R(k) = e=1    Le Re(k) .
                                                       ∑N      T   n+1
      5. Assemble the vector of boundary forces: F̄ = I =1 L̄ I F̄I
                                        (k)                   (k)
      6. Compute the global residual R̄ = R(k) − F̄. If ∥R̄l ∥ ≤ T O L, go to step 9.
                                                              ∑M       T
      7. Assemble the global tangent stiffness matrix: K(k) = e=1   Le Ke(k) Le .
                                                                                   −1       (k)
      8. Update coarse-scale displacements: a(k+1)
                                             l     = al(k) − Kll(k) R̄l . Set k ← k + 1, and go to step 2.
      9. Converged step. Set a n+1
                                   = a and {σ n+1 , εen+1 , ξ en+1 }(xg )g∈Z = {σ e(k) , εe(k) , ξ e(k) }(xg )g∈Z . Determine q e
                                      (k)       e

         and α from Eq. (62) and Eq. (61), respectively (e = 1, 2 . . . M).
              e




                                                   Box II. Coarse-scale, nonlinear problem.



strains at the ECM integration points may be employed to discriminate which are the “critical” domains and apply
to such domains the corresponding downscaling equations.

9. Numerical assessment
9.1. Rectangular cross-section beam

   We begin the numerical assessment by deriving a coarse-scale model for the linear elastic behavior of a 3D
prismatic structure made up by repeating, along the x-axis, the rectangular slice shown in Fig. 4.a (1D periodicity).
The transverse dimensions are h y = 0.1 m and h z = 0.06 m, while the thickness is w = h y /10 = 0.01 m.
The material is isotropic, with Young’s Modulus E = 70 000 MPa, and Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3. The unit cell
is discretized using a structured mesh of m = 4 × 20 × 10 = 800 eight-nodes hexahedral elements, resulting in
n = 1155 “fine-scale” nodes, and m gs = 800 · 8 = 6400 Gauss points. The non-interface boundaries ∂ Ω̄non , on the
other hand, are divided into the 4 portions shown in Fig. 4.a.

9.1.1. Offline stage
    As pointed out in Section 7.1, the number of unit cells and the boundary conditions for “training” the reduced-
order model depends on the scope of the analysis. In this case, we are interested only in how loads are transmitted
along the span of the structure (we shall deal with local effects later). Therefore, by virtue of Saint Venant’s
principle, the prismatic structure needs to be sufficiently large so as to ignore local effects due to the application
of boundary conditions on its ends. We have taken a span of L = 5h y = 0.5 m (thus, the structure has L/w = 50
slices). Four distinct 3D FE analyses have been carried out (to meet the requirement stated in Eq. (84)). In each
of them, the nodal displacements of one the ends of the prismatic structure are set to zero, while the other end is
30                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 4. Rectangular cross-section beam problem. (a) FE discretization of the unit cell. Definition of interface (∂ Ω̄1 and ∂ Ω̄2 ) and non-interface
     i , i = 1, 2, 3, 4) boundaries. (b) Structure and boundary conditions using for “training”. The unit cells whose displacement, reactions
(∂ Ω̄non
and stress solutions are included in the snapshot matrices are highlighted in red. (c) Deformed shapes of the four tests used for training.
(For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)




Fig. 5. Modes obtained from the training shown in Fig. 4.b. Left: Self-equilibrating reactive modes (Ψ1 , Ψ2 . . . Ψ6 ). Right: Straining modes
(Φ1 , Φ2 . . . Φ6 ).



subjected to a rotation around the axis (to capture torsion behavior), a displacement along the x-axis (to capture
axial behavior) and transversal displacements in the y and z directions (to capture bending behavior in both axes).
These loading conditions are depicted in Fig. 4.b, and the corresponding FE deformed shapes in Fig. 4.c. The
solution in displacements, reactive forces between domains and stresses of the slices of the central portion of the
structure, highlighted in red in Fig. 4.b, are stored in the corresponding snapshot matrices (step 3 in Box I). Next
the SVD is applied on the reactive and displacement matrices (step 4 in Box I). We use for this the partitioned
SVD proposed by the author in Ref. [16], using a relative tolerance of ϵλ = 10−3 for the four block matrices; this
yields a total of p = 6 self-equilibrating interface force modes. These modes are shown in Fig. 5 (top). Next we
apply the SVD to the straining displacement matrix, with a tolerance ϵd = 10−4 , obtaining 8 modes. Following the
“alignment” method explained in Section 7.3.1, we determine from the space spanned by these 8 modes the subspace
energetically associated with the p = 6 reactive modes Ψ . In Fig. 5 (bottom) we display the deformed shapes of
the obtained p = 6 straining modes. It is worth noting that, albeit both the SVD and the alignment algorithm are
purely “data-driven” procedures, the outcome modes do have a distinct physical interpretation: Φ1 is clearly the
axial mode (pure dilatational behavior due to Poisson’s effect); Φ2 displays the typical out-of-plane warping caused
by torsion; Φ3 and Φ4 may be identified as pure bending modes (the cross-section remains approximately plane);
while Φ5 and Φ6 exhibit the characteristic cubic warping of shear deformation produced by simple bending.
    Having determined Ψ and Φ, we can move to the next offline step of Box I: the determination of the reduced set
of integration points (step 5). The SVD of the stress snapshot matrix (Expr. (123)), with tolerance ϵσ = ϵλ = 10−3
gives, as expected, r = 6 stress modes. With these modes, and the reduced B-matrices B ∗ at the m gs = 6400 Gauss
points of the mesh, we build the internal forces matrix A f of Eq. (124). This matrix has p · r = 36 columns, out of
which only q = 21 are linearly independent16 (this follows from applying the SVD, see Expr. (123), with tolerance
ϵ f = 10−6 ).
    Then we employ the Empirical Cubature Method (ECM), presented in Appendix A, to select, among the
m gs = 6400 Gauss points of the FE mesh, a set of m ∗gs points such that the integration error is below a certain
 16 Interestingly, this figure coincides with the number of independent entries of the p × p reduced stiffness matrix Φ T K Φ, which is
symmetric and therefore: q = ( p + 1) p/2 = 7 · 6/2 = 21.
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                            31




Fig. 6. Determination, via the Empirical Cubature Method (see Appendix A), of the reduced set of integration weights and their associated
volumetric weights. (a) Integration error (%) versus number of selected points. (b) Location of the finite elements containing the m ∗gs = 15
points used for integration (1 point per element). (c) Volumetric weights, in % of the total volume of the unit cell.




Fig. 7. Top: Deformed shapes corresponding to the four FE training tests (140 · 103 DOFs). The portion displayed with stress values (σx ,
τx y , τx z and equivalent Von Mises, in MPa) is the one from which the training snapshots are extracted. Bottom: Deformed coarse-scale
mesh (51 · 6 = 306 DOFs), along with the reconstructed stress distributions (in MPa).



tolerance (in this case we have set ϵecm = 10−3 ). Fig. 6.a contains the graph of relative integration error versus
number of points. Zero integration error is achieved when the number of points coincides with the number of
internal force modes q = 21; on the other hand, for rendering the error below the prescribed tolerance, m ∗gs = 15
points are required. The location of the finite elements containing these m ∗gs = 15 points is shown in Fig. 6.b, and
the associated volumetric weights (in % of the total volume) in Fig. 6.c.
    The next offline operation (step 6 in Box I) is the determination of how many and which (if any) straining
modes V̂1 = V̂2 for the fictitious interfaces are to be incorporated in the formulation. However, since the number
of reaction modes is p = 6, there can be no straining interface modes (this follows from Eq. (107)). Thus, the
fictitious interfaces will only experience rigid-body motions, or, in other words, our coarse-scale element only
possesses 6 DOFs per node (3 translations and 3 rotations) —just like a standard Timoshenko’s beam element.

9.1.2. Online analyses
    We now focus on examining the predictive capabilities of the above derived coarse-scale model. We begin by
conducting the coarse-scale counterparts of the FE analyses used to “train” the model. The 1D coarse-scale mesh
is formed in this case by M = 50 two-node elements (and thus N = 51 nodes). The Dirichlet boundary conditions
are introduced by prescribing the 6 DOFs of the two end nodes: a1 = 0 (fixed end at x = xmin ); and a N (i) = γ
for the other end at x = xmax , with a N ( j) = 0 for j ̸= i (i = 1 and γ = 0.01 m for the axial tests; i = 2, 3 and
γ = 0.01 m for the y-bending and z-bending tests, respectively; lastly, i = 4 and γ = 0.01 rad for the torsion
tests). Fig. 7 shows, for these training tests, the deformed shapes computed by the standard FE (top) and coarse-scale
(bottom) models. For comparison purposes, the stress distributions (σx , τx y , τx z and Von Mises equivalent stress,
respectively) corresponding to the slices used for training are displayed in both cases (in the coarse-scale model,
these distributions are obtained by the “reconstruction” procedure explained in Section 8). Visually, there are no
discernible differences between the two contour plots in any of the four tests. A more quantitative assessment is
carried out in Table 1, wherein we compare the non-zero entries of the coarse-scale reactive forces at the ends
32                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

Table 1
Rectangular cross-section cell. Comparative study of the reactive forces (M N ) and moments (M N · m) at the ends of the beam for the
training tests, computed by the standard FE (fine-scale) model, and the “trained” coarse-scale model.
                             Fx (test a)        Fy (test b)        Mz (test b)        Fz (test c)        M y (test c)       Mx (test d)
 Fine-scale model            8.48               0.305              7.62 · 10−2        0.119              2.98 · 10−2        2.51 · 10−3
 Coarse-scale model          8.40               0.298              7.47 · 10−2        0.116              2.90 · 10−2        2.44 · 10−3
 Error (%)                   0.94               2.29               1.97               2.52               2.68               1.24




Fig. 8. (a) Prismatic structure (150 slices) and applied loads employed to test the coarse-scale model. (b) Deformed shape (×200) and Von
Mises stress computed by the standard FE (fine-scale solution, ≈ 420·103 DOFs). (c) Deformed shape of the coarse-scale mesh (6·151 = 906
DOFs). (d) Deformed shape and Von Mises equivalent stress computed by reconstruction of the coarse-scale solution.



of the beam with the resultant and moment resultant of the fine-scale nodal reactive forces. In all the four cases,
discrepancies are below 3%.
    The previous analyses demonstrate that the reduced-order model is consistent with its full-order counterpart, in
the sense that, at least, it can reproduce the results employed in the training process. But the actual usefulness of a
reduced-order model is to be examined in scenarios in which the geometry and the loading conditions are notably
different from that used in the training stage. To explore the capabilities of our coarse-scale model in this regard, we
have devised the test sketched in Fig. 8.a. The prismatic beam is 3 times longer that the one used for training, and
it is subjected to lateral loads in the y and z direction (recall that the training tests have no external forces), as well
as to a rotation around the x-axis on the surface at x = 1.5 m, while the other end, at x = 0, remains fixed. Fig. 8.b
and 8.d display the deformed shape and the contour plot of Von Mises stress computed by the standard FE method
and the coarse-scale model, respectively. The coarse-scale mesh (Fig. 8.c) is formed in this case by M = 150
two-node elements. The qualitatively resemblance between the deformed shapes and stress values predicted by the
FE model and the coarse-scale model (by reconstruction) is huge — despite the fact that the number of DOFs has
been reduced by a factor over 500. The only perceptible differences in stresses are detected at the ends, and this
is because the reduced-order model has not been trained for capturing the local effects due to Dirichlet boundary
conditions (the reduced-order model fails to capture the stress concentrations at the corners). In more quantitative
terms, the maximum displacements (euclidean norm) predicted by the standard FE is dmax = 1.46 mm, while the
coarse-scale model yields dmax = 1.47 mm, just 0.68% above.

9.2. I-shaped cross-section beam

   The procedure explained in the foregoing for the slice of rectangular cross-section can be applied to any unit
cell, regardless of its geometrical complexity. To illustrate this statement, we address in what follows the case of a
straight beam with the I-shaped cross-section (IPN-100 profile, with h y = 0.1 m and h z = 0.05 m) shown in Fig. 9.
The thickness is w = h y /10 = 0.01 m, and the material is isotropic, with Young’s Modulus E = 70 000 MPa, and
Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3. The training parameters (sampled slices, tolerances for the SVD and ECM, and so forth)
                      J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                             33




Fig. 9. I-shaped cross-section beam. (a) FE discretization of the unit cell (437 × 3 = 1311 hexahedral elements and 2292 nodes.).
(b) Deformed shapes of the four tests used for training. (c) SVD error (%) versus number of Lagrange multipliers modes.




Fig. 10. (a) Modes obtained from the training shown in Fig. 9.b. Top: Self-equilibrating reactive modes. Bottom: Straining modes.
(b) Location of the finite elements containing the m ∗gs = 32 ECM integration points (out of a total of m gs = 1311 · 8 = 10 488 Gauss points).
(c) Interface straining mode ( V̂1 = V7 ) computed by the method described in Algorithm 3.



are exactly the same as the ones employed for the rectangular cross-section beam of Section 9.1. The deformed
shapes corresponding to the four training tests are displayed in Fig. 9.b. On the other hand, Fig. 9.c represents the
SVD truncation error17 for the reactive forces versus the number of modes. According to this graph, the number
of modes needed to achieve the required accuracy (ϵλ = 10−3 ) is p = 8, that is, two more modes than in the
case of the rectangular cross-section. These p = 8 self-equilibrating reactive modes, together with the deformed
shapes of its work-conjugate straining modes are shown in Fig. 10.a. Using the same procedure explained for the
rectangular cross-section slice, we determine the reduced set of integration points. In this case m ∗gs = 32 ECM
points are required, out of a total of m gs = 1311 · 8 = 10 488 Gauss points; the location of these ECM points are
shown in Fig. 10.b.
    As for the interface straining modes (step 6 of Box I), application of Algorithm 3 to the p = 8 straining and
reactive modes of Fig. 10.a indicates that, in this case, and as opposed to the rectangular cross-section beam, the
fictitious interface does possess one straining mode.18 The deformed shape of such an interface straining mode,
displayed in Fig. 10.c, has the characteristic signature of a torsion, out-of-plane warping deformation —the flanges
rotate around the web axis in opposite directions. The coarse-scale element in the case at hand, thus, possesses 7
DOFs per node, namely, the amplitudes of the n r b = 6 rigid-body modes, plus the amplitude of this additional
straining mode. It is instructive to note that this result concurs with the predictions of advanced beam theories
 17 This SVD truncation error is defined in Eq. (91).
 18 Indeed, the intersection of the subspaces of reactive modes of both interface boundaries turns out to be of dimension 7, which implies,
according to Eq. (107), that n̂ int = 7 − nr b = 1.
34                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 11. I-shaped cross-section cell. Top: Deformed shapes corresponding to the four FE training tests (∼261 · 103 DOFs). The portion
displayed with stress values (Von Mises, τx y , τx z and Von Mises, in MPa) is the one from which the training snapshots are extracted.
Bottom: Deformed coarse-scale mesh (51 · 7 = 357 DOFs), along with the reconstructed stress distributions.




Fig. 12. (a) Prismatic structure (100 slices) and applied loads employed to test the coarse-scale model for the I-shaped unit cell. (b) Evolution
of the twist angle and the amplitude of the straining mode (multiplied by a factor 104 ) along the length of the beam. (c) Deformed shape
(×50) and tangential stress (MPa) computed by the standard FE (d) Deformed shape and (reconstructed) tangential stress (MPa) computed
by the coarse-scale model.


Table 2
I-shaped cross-section cell. Comparative study of the reactive forces (M N ) and moments (M N · m) at the ends of the beam for the training
tests, computed by the standard FE (fine-scale) model, and the “trained” coarse-scale model.
                               Fx (test a)         Fy (test b)         Mz (test b)         Fz (test c)         M y (test c)        Mx (test d)
 Fine-scale model              4.49               0.233               5.85 · 10−2          2.41 · 10−2         6.02 · 10−2         7.77 · 10−5
 Coarse-scale model            4.46               0.231               5.78 · 10−2          2.39 ·10−2          5.98 · 10−2         7.68 · 10−5
 Error (%)                     0.67               0.86                1.20                 0.83                0.66                1.15



(cf. Ref. [24] or [25]), according to which standard 6 DOFs-per-node finite beam elements must be supplemented
by a “warping” degree-of-freedom in order to accurately capture torsion of thin-walled open sections.
   The accuracy of this 7-DOFs, 2-node element is evaluated following the procedure employed for the rectangular
cross-section. Qualitative consistency with the FE training tests in terms of stress distribution can be appreciated
in Fig. 11. Likewise, we can see in Table 2 that the discrepancies between the non-zero entries of the coarse-scale
reactive forces at the ends of the beam and the resultant and moment resultant of the fine-scale nodal reactive forces
are all below 1.2%.
   We complete the accuracy assessment by carrying out a comparative analysis with boundary conditions and
geometry different from those employed in training. Such conditions are depicted in Fig. 12.a. The prismatic beam
is 1 m longer (twice the length of the training structure), it is fixed on one end, with the other end completely
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                            35




Fig. 13. (a) Geometry and boundary conditions of the training test devised to “teach” the coarse-scale model how to behave under crushing
loads in the y-direction. (b) Deformed shaped (× 50) and contour plot of Von Mises stress computed by the standard FE method. (c) to
(h) Deformed shapes (×50) and (reconstructed) contour plots of Von Mises stress computed by the coarse-scale model for 6 distinct SVD
tolerances. In each case, we provide the number of coarse-scale DOFs per node n int as well as the error with respect to the FE solution
in capturing the maximum displacement (in %).



unconstrained,19 and it is subjected to tangential tractions and normal tractions along its length. The deformed
shaped (amplified by a factor f = 50) and the stress τx z (in MPa) computed by the standard FE method (∼520 · 103
DOFs) is shown in Fig. 12.c. Its coarse-scale counterpart (7 · 101 = 707 DOFs), on the other hand, is displayed in
Fig. 12.d. Notably, the coarse-scale model is able to capture the stress concentration occurring at the intersection
between the top flange and the web — in the portion of beam subjected to the torsion caused by the tangential
tractions. In terms of displacements, the coarse-scale model overpredicts the maximum displacement (which takes
at the top-left corner of the free end) by a factor of (2.85 − 2.64)/2.64 · 100 ≈ 8%, an error which is notably
higher than in the rectangular cross-section case, but which is still within acceptable accuracy margins. Lastly, we
plot in Fig. 12.b the evolution along the length of the beam of the amplitude of both this mode (V7 = V̂1 ) and the
rigid-body mode V4 . Observe that both curves exhibit a markedly nonlinear behavior, a fact that is in accordance
with the analytical predictions of advanced torsion theories — according to these theories, the evolution of the twist
angle is ruled by hyperbolic functions, see e.g. Ref. [26], pag. 436.

9.3. Local effects

   The two examples discussed in the foregoing were intended to illustrate the ability of the proposed approach in
automatically generating 2-node finite elements consistent, in the Saint Venant sense (i.e. ignoring local effects20 ),
with the underlying 3D elasticity theory. In what follows, we describe how the methodology can be easily adapted
to cope also with cases in which local effects become relevant and, thus, are to be incorporated.
   To this end, let us return to the rectangular cross-section slice of Section 9.1. Suppose we wish to devise a
coarse-scale element able to capture, aside from torsion, axial and bending behaviors, the deformations and stresses
caused by crushing loads in the y-direction.21 To “teach” the coarse-scale model how to behave under such loads,
we simply enrich the training database used in the example of Section 9.1 with the FE test shown in Fig. 13.a,
 19 Note that the training structure is fixed on both ends.
 20 The Saint Venant problem (see e.g. Refs. [27,28]) consists in finding the stress and displacement field that appear in transmitting loads
along prismatic beams of constant cross-section under the hypothesis that the local effects caused by such loads are negligible.
 21 Uniform tractions of equal value and opposite sign normal to the top and bottom boundary surfaces of the beam (the non-interface
boundaries ∂ Ω̄non
               1   and ∂ Ω̄non
                           2 ).
36                  J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 14. Left: p = 13 domain straining modes corresponding to the coarse-scale model of Fig. 13.f. Right: For this coarse-scale mode,
longitudinal evolution of the amplitude of the n̂ int = n int − nr b = 6 interface straining modes (V7 , V8 , . . . V12 ).



in which a crushing pressure of 1000 MPa is applied to the central slice. Following the offline protocol of Box I,
the solution of displacement, reactive forces and stresses of the 20 slices of the central portion of the structure
(see Fig. 13.b) is stored in pertinent block matrices, that are added to the corresponding 4 block matrices obtained
from the basic training of Fig. 4.c. Then we apply the already mentioned blockwise SVD to the resulting five
block matrices. To gain insight on how the increase of interface straining modes contributes to the accuracy of the
coarse-scale predictions, we launch 6 distinct coarse-scale analyses with varying values of the SVD tolerance for
the block matrix corresponding to the reactive forces in this crushing test (from ϵλcr ush = 1 to ϵλcr ush = 10−4 ); all
the other parameters remain fixed and equal to the values used in Section 9.1.
    Fig. 13.c to .h show the resulting deformed shapes (×50) and the (reconstructed) contour plots of Von Mises
stress in the central portion of the beam. Fig. 13.c corresponds to the limiting case in which the crushing tests are
ignored, and therefore n int = 6. Observe that the loaded slice is squeezed under the applied loads, yet the resulting
deformation is not transmitted to the adjacent slices, which remain unaltered — this is because this 6 DOFs-per-
node element is able to transmit only the resultant and moment resultant of the applied loads, which in this case
are zero. As the SVD tolerance decreases, the number of interface modes n int increases, and, as a consequence, the
displacement and stresses discontinuities between slices become less pronounced. For T O L = 10−4 (Fig. 13.h),
the jumps in displacements are imperceptible, and the resulting stress distribution is practically identical to the
“exact” FE distribution shown in Fig. 13.b. The local character of the straining DOFs can be appreciated in Fig. 14
(right), where we plot the amplitude along the beam of the n̂ int = 12 − n r b = 6 interface straining modes of the
coarse-scale model of Fig. 13.f —observe that the amplitudes decay in an exponential fashion as we move away
from the loaded slice. For completeness, in Fig. 14 (left) we also plot for this case the deformed shapes of the
p = 13 (cell) straining modes.
    To evaluate the performance of the coarse-scale model in a case distinct from the training problems, we employ
the structure (150 slices) and combined loads shown in Fig. 15.a. Notice that now the crushing loads are not applied
on a single slice, but varies along the central portion of the beam in a piece-wise constant fashion. Fig. 15.b, 15.c
and 15 display the solutions corresponding to the standard FE, and the coarse-scale model with n int = 12 and
n int = 19 DOFs per (coarse-scale) node, respectively. It can be seen that the stress distributions computed by both
coarse-scale models bear a close resemblance to its full-order counterpart. In the case of n int = 19 DOFs (Fig. 15.d),
they are practically indistinguishable, while in the n int = 12 DOFs (Fig. 15.c) mild discontinuities are observed
in the part in which the crushing loads are applied (this can be also appreciated in terms of displacements in the
enlarged view of 15.d). Nevertheless, it should be highlighted that the maximum displacement predicted by the 12
DOFs-per-node model is identical to that of the 19 DOFs-per-node model, a fact that shows that, remarkably, the
reduced-order solution can tolerate a certain degree of discontinuities at the fine-scale without affecting the overall
quality of coarse-scale solutions.
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                             37




Fig. 15. (a) Prismatic structure (150 slices) and applied loads employed to test the coarse-scale model for the local effects case. (b)
Deformed shape (×75) and Von Mises stresses computed by the standard FE (∼420 · 103 DOFs) (c) Deformed shape and (reconstructed)
Von Mises stresses computed by the coarse-scale model using n int = 12 DOFs per node (151 · 12 = 1812 DOFs). (d) Idem for n int = 19
(151 · 19 = 2869 DOFs).



9.4. Cellular solid (2D)

9.4.1. Linear regime
   We next address the derivation of a coarse-scale model for the linear elastic behavior – inelastic behavior will
be treated in the next Section – of 2D hexagonal structures (plane strain), made up by tiled copies of the regular
hexagonal cell of Fig. 16.a. The material is isotropic, with Young’s Modulus E = 70 000 MPa, and Poisson’s ratio
ν = 0.3. The unit cell is discretized using m = 2622 four-node quadrilateral elements (with 4 Gauss points per
element), resulting in n = 3314 nodes. To train the coarse-scale model, we use the 5-by-5 cells22 structure shown
in Fig. 16.b. Likewise, to satisfy the requirement embodied in Eq. (84), we carry out the four FE tests depicted
in Fig. 16 —2 tests for each periodicity direction. We then apply the partitioned SVD on the self-equilibrating
snapshots obtained from these FE analyses (using a tolerance ϵλ = 10−4 for each of the 4 block matrices). This
leads to p = 15 modes. We show in Fig. 17.a the corresponding work-conjugate straining patterns (computed by the
alignment method of Section 7.3.1). As for the ECM integration points (step 5 of Box I), we employ the following
tolerances for stresses, internal forces and error integration: ϵσ = ϵ f = 10−4 and ϵecm = 10−3 , respectively. This
results in r = 15 stress modes, q = 64 internal force modes, and m ∗gs = 60 ECM points (out of a total of
m gs = 4 · 2622 = 10 488 Gauss points). The location and associated volumetric weights of these m ∗gs = 60 ECM
points are displayed in the bar graph of Fig. 17.b. Observe that the four points with highest weights account for
more than 50% of the total volume.23
   Regarding the straining modes for each pair of fictitious interfaces (step 6 in Box I), application of Algorithm
3 yields n̂ int    int           int     int
            1 = n̂ 3 = 6 and n̂ 2 = n̂ 4 = 0, a number of modes that violates the stability condition (111), and
consequently, recourse to the (more conservative) procedure outlined in Algorithm 5 is to be made. This, in turn,
furnishes no straining modes for the top and bottom interfaces, and, for the other two interfaces, the three straining
modes (cubic, parabolic and extensional) shown in Fig. 17.c. The resulting coarse-scale finite element is pictorially
  22 The first question that arises when dealing with the training process is how many unit cells should be employed to construct the training
domain. To answer this question, we carried out analyses with structures of increasing number of domains (from 3-by-3 to 10-by-10 cells),
including in the snapshot matrices only the interior cells. The conclusion was that the computed modes are the same for domains of size
equal or larger than 5-by-5.
  23 This uneven distribution of weights (also observed in Fig. 5.c) is due to the “greedy” character of the employed selection algorithm
(the ECM, explained in Appendix A).
38                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 16. (a) FE discretization of the hexagonal cell. (b) 5-by-5 cell structure used for “training” (in the linear range). The unit cells whose
displacement, reactions and stress solutions are included in the snapshot matrices are the cells enclosed by the dashed line. (c) Boundary
conditions and FE deformed shapes corresponding to the four training tests.




Fig. 17. (a) p = 15 straining modes obtained from the training tests of Fig. 17.c. (b) Location of the m ∗gs = 60 integration points chosen
by the Empirical Cubature Method (among a total of m gs = 4 · 2622 = 10 488 Gauss points). The bars represent the volumetric weights of
each point (in % of the total volume). (c) Straining modes computed by Algorithm 5. for the boundary interfaces Γ̄1 and Γ̄3 .



represented in Fig. 18.a. It is conceptualized as a quadrilateral element with four midside nodes (the centroids
of the interface boundaries). The number of DOFs at nodes 1 and 3 are 6 (2 translations, 1 rotation, and the 3
straining modes described above), whereas nodes 2 and 4 only possess the 3 rigid-body DOFs. On the other hand,
the integration points (for internal forces) are the m ∗gs = 60 points computed by the ECM (see Fig. 17.b).
   Having defined this (admittedly unorthodox) finite element, a typical coarse-scale analysis would proceed as any
standard FE analysis. The only consideration to bear in mind is that the domain must be meshed with quadratic
quadrilateral elements of the same height and width as the unit cell, solely keeping in the connectivity matrix the
midside nodes—corner nodes are only used for post-processing purposes. We show in Fig. 18.b and .c the fine-
scale (FE) and coarse-scale solutions of the stretching test (first test in Fig. 17.c). To facilitate the interpretation
of results, the coarse-scale displacements are portrayed as if the structure were continuous — this is done by
extrapolating the values of the midside nodes to the corner nodes. For comparison purposes, we also show the
fine-scale, deformed mesh recovered from the coarse-scale solution. Visually, there are no discernible differences
between this deformed mesh and the exact one computed by the FE method. In term of forces, the accuracy is
                                                                                        fe
equally notable: the resultant of forces in the x-direction predicted by the FE is Fx = 3.0398 N, while the coarse-
                      r om
scale model gives Fx = 3.0396 N (an error of just 0.006%). The level of accuracy in the other 3 tests is less
                                                                                                              fe
astonishing, yet equally satisfactory from a practical point of view: the shear test (y direction) requires Fy = 0.5307
       r om                                                                   fe                    r om
and Fy = 0.5309 N (error 0.03%); the stretching test (y direction) Fy = 0.777 and Fy = 0.768 N (error
                                             fe
1.22%); and the shear test (x direction) Fx = 0.0994 and Fxr om = 0.0981 N (error 1.30%).
   To complete the assessment, we carry out the analysis of the L-shaped geometry of Fig. 19.a under the indicated
prescribed displacements. The deformed shapes and the displacement norm computed by the standard FE method
and the coarse-scale model are displayed in Fig. 19.b and .c. The former requires around 1 million standard 8-DOFs
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                            39




Fig. 18. Linear elastic regime. (a) Resulting 4-node coarse-scale finite element for the hexagonal unit cell (18 DOFs and 60 integration
points). (b) and (c) Deformed shape (x150) and contour plot of the norm of displacements (in m) corresponding to the stretching training
test (in the x-direction). (b) is the solution computed by the standard FE, while (c) is the solution computed using the 5-by-5 coarse-scale
finite element mesh (along with the “reconstructed” fine-scale deformed mesh).




Fig. 19. (a) Geometry and boundary conditions employed for assessing the coarse-scale model. (b) Deformed shape (×40) and contour plot
of displacements (euclidean norm) computed by the standard finite element method (around 1 million standard quadrilateral elements). (c)
Idem to (b), but computed by the coarse-scale model (351 18-DOFs quadrilateral elements). The enlarged view shows both the deformed
coarse-scale and fine-scale meshes. (d) (Coarse-scale) contour plot of maximum Von Mises stress (MPa), together with the fine-scale solution
corresponding to the most critical coarse-scale element (enlarged view).

Table 3
Resultant of horizontal and vertical forces in the L-shaped test of Fig. 19.a. Values computed by the standard FE model (1 million 8-DOFs
quadrilateral elements), the coarse-scale model (351 18-DOFs quadrilateral element, see Fig. 18.a); and the first-order homogenization model
(351 8-DOFs quadrilateral elements, using the homogenized elasticity matrix of Eq. (121)).
                   Fine-scale (FE) model           Coarse-scale model            Error            Homogenization (FE2 )           Error
 Fx (N )           15.12                           15.14                         0.13%            18.41                           21.76%
 Fy (N)            11.96                           11.99                         0.25%            14.36                           16.1%



quadrilateral elements, while the latter contains only 351 quadrilateral elements of the type defined in the foregoing
(18-DOFs per element). Despite this startling reduction in the number of elements, the deformed boundaries of both
geometries are practically identical. The same degree of accuracy is observed in the critical corner region, displayed
in magnified form for both cases, as well as in terms of resultant forces, summarized in Table 3.
40                   J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 20. Nonlinear regime. (a) Location of the m ∗gs = 107 of integration points computed by the ECM in this case. (b) Comparison of
the reaction forces in the nonlinear training test computed by the standard FE method and the elastic and inelastic coarse-scale elements
(m ∗gs = 60 and 107 ECM points per element, respectively). (c) and (d) Enlarged view showing the contour plots of Von Mises stresses (in
MPa).



  We also provide in this table the resultant forces computed by using the standard first-order homogenization (the
FE2 method); the homogenized elasticity matrix24 for this hexagonal unit cell is given by (in MPa)
               ⎡                                     ⎤
                 984.69 977.02 588.51 0.054
               ⎢977.02 984.63 588.5 0.052⎥
     C homog = ⎢
               ⎣588.51 588.5 3809.4 0.032⎦
                                                     ⎥                                                       (121)
                  0.054     0.052    0.032     3.81
We see that first-order homogenization grossly overpredicts both horizontal and vertical forces (22.76% and 16.1%
of error); by contrast, our multiscale approach furnishes a remarkable accurate prediction (error below 0.25 % for
both forces). These results emphasize one of the major advantages of the proposed multiscale method: its ability
of providing accurate results in scenarios in which the hypothesis of scale separation clearly does not hold.
   Lastly, Fig. 19.d exemplifies how the proposed approach allows one to easily perform a multiscale stress analysis.
Firstly, at the coarse scale, one can identify the critical regions by plotting the maximum Von Mises stress at each
element (maximum among the m ∗gs = 60 ECM integration points). Then, by simple matrix multiplications (see
Eq. (120)), one can reconstruct the stresses at all the Gauss points of the underlying unit cell mesh (the fine-scale),
and from this information, spot the areas with highest stresses (this is shown in the enlarged view of Fig. 19.d).

9.4.2. Nonlinear regime
   We carry out next a coarse-scale analyses in the nonlinear regime, by assuming that the material of the hexagonal
cells obeys a rate-independent Von Mises elastoplastic model, endowed with a linear, isotropic hardening law (yield
stress σ y = 60 MPa, and hardening modulus H = 700 MPa). Our interest lies in detecting the onset of formation
of plastic hinges (as described in Ref. [29]) at the intersection between the walls of the cell. To this end, we carry
out the test depicted in Fig. 20.b, in which the same 5-by-5 domain employed in the linear tests is stretched 1.1
mm in the y-direction. The constitutive differential equations are integrated in time (with n steps = 40 time steps)
using the classical, fully implicit backward-Euler scheme [30].
   To derive a coarse-scale element that accounts for the nonlinear effects occurring in this test, we proceed as
in Example 9.3, that is, by simply enriching the training data base with the solutions (a total of 9 · 40 = 360
snapshots) coming from this nonlinear problem. We then apply the operations specified in steps 4, 5 and 6 of the
offline procedure of Box I, using ϵλ = ϵσ = 10−3 as truncation tolerances for the additional matrices, while keeping
the remaining parameters to the values used in the elastic case. This gives p = 17, r = 27, m ∗gs = 107 and 7-3-7-3
coarse-scale DOFs. It is interesting to note that, in passing from the linear to the nonlinear regime, the kinematics
 24 The homogenized elasticity matrix has been calculated following the standard procedure of running 3 FE simulations of a single unit
cell under periodic boundary conditions (the 3rd row of the matrix corresponds to the stresses in the z-direction).
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                          41




Fig. 21. (a) Geometry and boundary conditions employed for assessing the coarse-scale model in the elastoplastic regime. (b) Resultants of
vertical and horizontal forces versus time computed by the standard FE method and the coarse-scale model.



of the coarse-scale element barely changes (there is only two additional DOFs), whereas the number of integration
points computed by the ECM practically doubles (from 60 to 107). As can be seen in Fig. 20.a, such points are
mainly concentrated at the intersection between the walls of the cell, which is precisely where plastic yielding takes
place (see Fig. 20.c). To assess the effect of the number of ECM points in the accuracy of the predictions, we plot
in Fig. 20.b the graphs of the reaction force versus time computed by the FE model and the linear and nonlinear
coarse-scale models (m ∗gs = 60 and m ∗gs = 107, respectively). Observe that the graph of the coarse-scale model
with m ∗gs = 107 ECM points is practically identical to the full-order graph, the maximum discrepancy at the end
being only 0.4%. By contrast, the graph of the coarse-scale model with m ∗gs = 60 does capture the linear branch,
but clearly fails to detect the onset of plastic yielding.
   As customary, the evaluation of the predictive capabilities of this coarse-scale element is completed by examining
a problem whose geometry and boundary conditions are markedly distinct to that used in training. We use for this
purpose the L-shaped geometry described earlier (see Fig. 19.a) under the cycle of horizontal and vertical prescribed
displacement depicted in Fig. 21.a (discretized in 300 time steps). The resultants of the vertical and horizontal
reaction forces versus time computed by the standard FE method and the ROM are shown in Fig. 21.b. We can
see that the ROM is indeed able to accurately reproduce the whole loading/unloading cycle for both vertical and
horizontal forces, with a maximum deviation at the peak forces of 1.3%, a fact that demonstrates the applicability
of the model to accurately predict the response for scenarios different from the training cases. As for the issue
of computational efficiency, the FE simulation (around 1 million standard quadrilateral elements) took around
5 h in an in-house, vectorized MATLAB code operating in a linux platform,25 while the reduced-order model
(357 coarse-scale elements) required about 2 min for the same number of steps — the speedup26 factor is, thus,
around 300.

9.5. Composite shell

   We conclude the assessment of the proposed methodology by deriving a coarse-scale model for the linear elastic
behavior of a cylindrical shell, made up by tiling copies of the porous, composite cell of Fig. 22.a. The cell is
formed by two materials, one with Young’s Modulus E m = 70 000 MPa and Poisson’s ratio νm = 0.3 (the matrix);
and the other one with E i = 3E m and νi = νm (the four cylindrical inclusions). The thickness is t = 0.24 mm, and
the radius of the midplane r = 42.452 mm. Likewise, the rotation of the interface boundary ∂ Ω̄3 with respect to

 25 Intel(R) Core(TM) i7, with 8 processors at 2.80 GHz.
 26 This speedup factor is calculated without taking into account the offline cost of running the FE training analyses and constructing the
bases, since such computations have to be performed just once. In the case at hand, the FE training process required around 3 min (220 s
for the FE training tests, and 50 s for constructing the bases and determining the ECM points).
42                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 22. (a) Geometry and FE discretization of the shell composite cell (top and front views). Dimensions are given in mm. (b) 5-by-5
cell structure and boundary conditions used for “training” the coarse scale model. The unit cells whose displacement, reactions and stress
solutions are included in the snapshot matrices are the 9 cells enclosed by the dashed line. (c) Amplified FE deformed shapes corresponding
to three (T1, T2 and T4) of the 8 training tests.



∂ Ω̄1 is given by the matrix
                cos θ 0 sin θ
              ⎡                ⎤

        Q3 = ⎣ 0        1    0 ⎦                                                                                                             (122)
                −sin θ 0 cos θ
where, as indicated in Fig. 22.a, θ = 2π/80 —thus, 80 unit cells are necessary to complete a revolution around
the y-axis. The 3D geometry is discretized using m = 4 · 1431 = 5724 (8-node) hexahedral elements, resulting in
n = 7680 nodes.27
   To train the coarse-scale model, we use the 5-by-5 cells structure and the boundary conditions depicted in
Fig. 22.b. For each of the two periodicity directions, the nodal displacements of one of the interface boundaries
are set to zero, while the opposite surface is subjected to prescribed displacements (0.1 mm) in 3 mutually
orthogonal directions (tests T1,T2,T3,T5,T6,T7), and torsional rotations (0.1 rad, tests T4 and T8). The solution
in displacements, reactive forces between domains and stresses of the 3-by-3 inner cells — enclosed by the dashed
line in Fig. 22.b—- are stored in the corresponding snapshot matrices.28 We then follow the offline procedure of
Box I, using truncation tolerances ϵλ = ϵσ = ϵecm = 10−3 and ϵ f = 10−4 . This gives p = 22 straining and reactive
modes (four of such modes are shown in Fig. 23.a and .b), 7 interface modes for each interface, and m ∗gs = 179 ECM
points. The resulting coarse-scale element, displayed in Fig. 23.c, consists, thus, in a cylindrical shell quadrilateral
featuring 4 midside nodes with 7 DOFs each (3 translations, 3 rotations and 1 straining DOF), and 179 ECM
integration points. The reduction, with respect to the original 3D mesh, in number of DOFs and integration points
is therefore equal to 3 · 7680/28 ≈ 823 and 8 · 5724/179 ≈ 256, respectively. Yet, the coarse-scale model still
manages to reproduce the training test with acceptable degree of accuracy: in terms of resultant reaction forces, the
error ranges from 0.10% in test T6 to 3.28% in test T2. The level of approximation can be better appreciated in
Fig. 24, where we display the deformed shape and Von Mises distribution of test T1, along with its coarse-scale
counterparts (Fig. 24.b is the deformed coarse-scale mesh, of 5-by-5 quadrilaterals, together with the cloud of ECM
points used for integration, and Fig. 24.c is the reconstructed fine-scale solution).
   As usual, we next evaluate the predictive capabilities of the coarse-model in scenarios in which the input
parameters are markedly different from the input parameters used in the training process. Two examples will be
 27 A word concerning the meshing procedure is in order here. To ensure conformity between meshes of opposite boundary interfaces
(∂ Ω̄1 with ∂ Ω̄3 , and ∂ Ω̄2 with ∂ Ω̄4 ), the discretization was done in an “unbent” configuration, with ∂ Ω̄3 parallel to the z–y plane; then, by
applying a linearly varying rotation around the y-axis, the cell was transformed into the curved geometry shown in Fig. 22.a.
 28 In this case, since the structure is curved, such quantities have to be rotated back to the local reference system of the unit cells.
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                             43




Fig. 23. (a) and (b) Four of the p = 22 straining and reactive modes, respectively, obtained from the training set of Fig. 22.b. (c) Resulting
coarse-scale element, featuring 4 nodes (with 7 DOFs per node) and m ∗gs = 179 ECM points.




Fig. 24. Training test T1. (a) Deformed shape (×10) and Von Mises stress contour plot computed by the FE. (b) 5-by-5 quadrilateral,
coarse-scale deformed mesh (×10), along with the ECM integration points (m ∗gs = 179 for each coarse-scale element). (c) Deformed mesh
and contour plot of the reconstructed Von Mises stresses (from the information of the ECM points).



employed for this. The first one is depicted in Fig. 25.a. It consists of a domain of 15 cells in both the axial and
circumferential direction, clamped at the four edges, and subjected to a uniform pressure of 0.1 MPa, distributed
over an area spanning 5-by-5 cells. Fig. 25.b shows the deformed shape and contour plot of displacements computed
by the FE method (featuring 1.3 million elements and 5.1 million DOFs). Fig. 25.b, .c and .d, on the other hand,
display the displacement field predicted by the coarse-scale model (225 elements of the type defined in Fig. 23.c,
and 3360 DOFs); Fig. 25.b is the continuous 2D representation, while Fig. 25.c and .d contain the reconstructed
3D field. The qualitative resemblance of the FE and ROM 3D fields (Fig. 25.a and .c) is notorious, the only subtle
difference being that the area with highest displacements appears to be more dispersed in the FE case. In terms of
maximum displacement, the FE yields 0.142 mm, while the ROM predicts 0.145 mm (only 2.1% above). These small
deviations are largely compensated by the enormous savings in computational time afforded by the coarse-model:
assembling and solving the coarse-scale equations take less than 1 s in the employed computer; by contrast, the FE
requires more than 20 min to do the same operations — hence the speedup factor in this case is above 1200.
    The second – and last – example used to test the performance of the shell coarse-scale element of Fig. 23.c is
described in Fig. 26. The structure is a holed cylinder tube comprising 128 cells in the axial direction — and 80
in the circumferential direction. The hole is located midway between the ends of the cylinder, and it is made by
removing a patch of 5-by-6 cells, as indicated in Fig. 26.a. The cylinder is fixed at one end, and it is stretched
by displacing a distance 0.1 mm the other end in the axial direction. The goal is to study the stress concentration
caused by the presence of the hole. As done previously in the cellular solid problem (see Section 9.4.1), this stress
analysis is conducted in a multiscale fashion. Firstly, we solve the system of coarse-scale equations and construct
a 2D coarse-scale representation of the Von Mises equivalent stress (by plotting, for each element, the maximum
Von Mises stress among the m ∗gs = 179 ECM points). The resulting contour plot is shown in Fig. 26.b. The peak
value is located, as one may expect, at one of the corners of the hole. Then, we reconstruct the 3D Von Mises stress
field by the post-processing procedure of Section 8. This is done in Fig. 26.c, where we show the 2D deformed
44                  J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192




Fig. 25. (a) 15-by-15 cell domain and boundary conditions used to test the coarse-scale element defined in Fig. 25.c. (b) Deformed shape
(×40) and contour plot of displacements (euclidean norm) computed by the standard FE (1.3 million elements and 5.1 million DOFs).
(c) Idem to (b), but computed with the coarse-scale model (15 × 15 = 225 elements and 3360 DOFs). (d) and (e) Reconstructed fine-scale
displacement solution.




Fig. 26. Tensile test on a holed tube formed by 128 × 80 cells (the hole occupies an area of 6 × 5 cells). (a) Coarse-scale mesh
(M = 128 · 80 − 6 · 5 = 10 212 elements) and employed boundary conditions. (b) Deformed shape (×40) and contour plot of coarse-scale
Von Mises stresses. This contour plot is made by displaying the maximum stress among the m ∗gs = 179 ECM points of each coarse-scale
element. (c) and (d) Fine-scale mesh reconstructed at the 500 elements with highest maximum stresses.



geometry together with the reconstructed contour plot corresponding to the 500 cells with highest values in the plot
of Fig. 26.b. A closer inspection of the enlarged view of Fig. 26.d allows us to finally reveal the actual fine-scale
mechanism producing the peak stress observed at the coarse-scale — it is caused by stress concentration at the pore
located at the corner.
                    J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192         45

   To rigorously complete the assessment, it would be necessary to compare these results with a direct simulation
using the standard FE — as it has been done with the rest of the problems discussed in previous sections.
Unfortunately, in this case, the sheer number of elements of the resulting FE mesh29 (more than 58.5 million)
makes this assessment prohibitively costly using the employed computer and FE software (which, recall, is an
in-house Matlab code). By contrast, the coarse-scale simulation takes less than 5 s in the same computer, a fact
that emphasizes the tremendous gains in performance afforded by the proposed multiscale scheme. Concerning the
accuracy issue, a glance at both Fig. 26.c and .d indicate that both the reconstructed displacements and stress fields
are fairly continuous; this can be taken as an evidence that the results may be trusted, because, as we saw in dealing
with the local effects problem of Fig. 13.(c), inaccuracies of the coarse-scale model typically manifest themselves
in ostensible jumps in the reconstructed fine-scale fields.

10. Concluding remarks
    At the heart of this work lies the conviction that any simplified structural model can be automatically derived from
a more complex one by combining domain decomposition and dimensionality reduction. This conviction is grounded
in an inescapable truth: dimensionality reduction algorithms are far better than humans in uncovering dominant
patterns from data, and therefore, they can be harnessed to identify, from solutions generated with the complex
model, the force/deformation low-dimensional parameterizations that characterize simplified structural models. The
task of the modeler in this new paradigm is, thus, limited to that of judiciously designing the computational tests
from which the “training” data are obtained.
    We have chosen as vehicle for exposing this idea the two-scale modeling of periodic structures with unit
cells possessing disjoint interface boundaries — and operating in the quasi-static, small deformations regime.
Nevertheless, the employed ROM partitioning framework is rather general, and extensions to continuous interface
boundaries, as well as geometrically distinct subdomains, should be feasible with minor modifications. To consider
continuous interface boundaries, it would be necessary to include constraint equations accounting for the intersection
entities, which in the proposed framework would translate into simply adding vertex nodes to the coarse-scale
elements (we saw in the examples of Figs. 18 and 23 that, in 2D periodicity, the coarse-scale elements are
quadrilateral with solely midside nodes). Departures from the periodicity condition, on the other hand, would require
a redefinition of the training procedure (specific training tests should be devised for each family of geometrically
related subdomains), and a revision of Algorithms 3 and 5 for extracting the interface modes from the domain
displacement modes. The remaining elements of the approach would remain unchanged.
    Extensions to dynamic and/or large deformation regimes, on the other hand, will offer varying degrees of
difficulty depending on the situation. The adaption to scenarios with small strains but large rotations of the
subdomain (for beam- and shell-like structures) should not pose significant conceptual challenges — albeit it
will surely prove algorithmically intricate. The training process would be the same as in the small deformation
regime, and one would have just to replace the additive decomposition with infinitesimal rotations of Eq. (14) by
Eq. (32) by their finite rotation counterparts, as it is done in co-rotational finite element approaches (cf. Ref. [31]).
Moderate strains and incorporation of inertial effects should not entail unsurmountable difficulties either — in fact,
the employed partitioning framework was originally devised for dynamic problems [9]. By contrast, severe obstacles
might be encountered when moving to cases in which the unit cells undergo relatively large deformations (especially
if there is buckling), since in such cases the premise that the straining part of the domain displacements admits a
low-dimensional linear expansion ceases to hold. Such a roadblock may be partially overcome by replacing the
linear approximations by nonlinear mappings, which may be determined in turn by some type of manifold learning
algorithm, as done, for instance, in Ref. [32] for one-scale dynamic problems.
    Of paramount importance for the consistency of the overall approach has been to adopt a partitioning framework
equipped with fictitious interfaces, and to assign the role of coarse-scale DOFs to the amplitude of the modes
of such interfaces. Furthermore, this choice has enabled us to establish a direct link with existing finite element
beam theories. Indeed, we have seen in the rectangular beam example of Section 9.1 that our method leads to a
2-node element with 6 DOFs, as in a standard Timoshenko’s element. The difference is that, in our approach, it
is the fictitious interfaces that remain plane, not the faces of the slices, which are free to warp due to torsion and
shear. This is why our 2-node beam element is totally consistent with the underlying 3D theory — as opposed
 29 There are M = 128 · 80 − 6 · 5 = 10 212 cells, and m = 5724 hexahedral elements per cell.
46                  J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

to Timoshenko’s or other analytical theories. Besides, the proposed methodology is able to automatically detect
from the provided data when it is necessary to enrich the kinematics with more DOFs. This has been fittingly
illustrated by the I-shaped cross-section beam problem, in which Algorithm 3 has “discovered” the fact that the
kinematics of thin-walled open cross-section cannot be accurately represented with just translation and rotations, but
require an additional warping DOF (see Fig. 10). Another pivotal ingredient of the proposed approach has been the
hyperreduction of the internal forces of the subdomains via the Empirical Cubature Method. In this regard, we have
observed in the hexagonal cell example of Section of 9.3 that the number of ECM points increases considerably
when passing from the linear to the nonlinear regime, even if the kinematics remains practically the same. Therefore,
it would be worthy to explore whether it is possible to further improve the ECM so that it returns less integration
points for the same accuracy level. In principle, there is room for improvement, because the ECM, as well are
other similar algorithms either based on nonnegative least-squares (such as the method advocated by Farhat et co-
workers [33]), or on linear programming (such as the Empirical Quadrature Method of Patera et co-workers [34]),
are not optimal, for they do not exploit the topology of the function they intend to integrate.

Declaration of competing interest
   The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments
   The research leading to these results has received funding from ANACONDA BIOMED S.L., Spain and the
Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities via grant RTC-2017-6749-1. The author also acknowledges
financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, through the “Severo Ochoa
Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D” (CEX2018-000797-S)”.

Appendix A. Empirical Cubature method
   A key offline step (see Box I, item 5) is the selection among the Gauss points of the unit cell mesh of a reduced
set of points able to accurately integrate (when equipped with especially tailored weights) the internal virtual work,
see Eq. (46). Here this task is carried out using an algorithmically improved version – in a sense that will be defined
later – of the Empirical Cubature Method (ECM), proposed by the author in Ref. [16]. As explained therein, the
ECM operates on a snapshot matrix A f that depends on the value of the integrand at all the m gs Gauss points and
for all the P configurations. In this case, the integrand is the reduced internal work per unit volume B ∗T (xg )σ (xg , µ).
Since in the small strain regime B ∗T (x g ) ∈ R p×s does not depend on the input parameters µ, rather than storing
the internal forces at all Gauss points and for all configurations (which requires a matrix of size m gs × P · p), it
proves more efficient to solely store the stress solutions in a snapshot matrix Aσ ∈ Rs m gs ×P (see Eq. (87)). Then,
by applying the truncated SVD (with a tolerance ϵσ ∼ ϵλ ), one can obtain a basis matrix for the stresses:
      [Λ, •, •] = SVD(Aσ , ϵσ ),                                                                                      (123)
where Λ ∈ Rs·m gs ×r , r being the number of stress modes (which should be of the same order as the number of
straining and self-equilibrating modes p). Having the stress basis matrix at one’s disposal, the desired matrix of
internal forces is determined as
       A f := F 11 · · · F 1p F 12 · · · F 2p · · · F 12 · · · F rp m × p·r
              [                                                    ]
                                                                                                            (124)
                                                                              gs

where the expression for F Ij ∈ Rm gs reads
                    √
                           I (x1)Λ(b1 , j)
              ⎡           ∗T                    ⎤
                    √W1 B ∗T
              ⎢       W2 B I (x2)Λ(b2 , j)        ⎥
      F Ij := ⎢               ..                                                                                      (125)
              ⎢                                   ⎥
                               .
                                                  ⎥
              ⎣                                   ⎦
                   Wm gs B ∗T                 ,
               √
                           I  (xm gs )Λ(bm gs   j)
(here bg = {s (g − 1) + 1, s (g − 1) + 2 . . . s g}). Next we apply again the truncated SVD on A f to eliminate
redundancies and achieve an orthogonal basis matrix for the internal forces
      [Υ , •, •] = SVD( A f , ϵ f ).                                                                                  (126)
                       J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                      47



Algorithm 7: Empirical Cubature Method (enhanced version of the algorithm in Ref. [16])
 1 Function [z, ω] =ECM(G,W ,T O L)
      Data: G ∈ R p×M , where GG T = I; W ∈ R M , Wi > 0; tolerance 0 ≤√T O L ≤ 1                      √
      Result: z ⊂ {1, 2 . . . M}, ω > 0 ∈√Rm , such that ∥G(:, z)α∥ ≤ T O L∥G W ∥, where ωi = W (z i )αi
 2    z ← ∅; y ← {1, 2 . . . M}; b ← G W ; r ← b; α ← ∅; H ← ∅ // Initializations
 3    y ← y \ h, where h = [h 1 , h 2 ...] such that ∥G(:, h i )∥ ≤ ϵ // Remove points whose associated values in G
             are lower than a given tolerance (ϵ ∼ 10−6 )
 4       while ∥r∥/∥b∥ > T O L AND length(z)< p AND length ( y)> 0 do
 5          i = arg max g Ty r, where g j = G(:, j)/∥G(:, j)∥ // Select the column most ‘‘positively’’ parallel to
                         i∈ y
                   the residual r
 6               if z = ∅ then
 7                    H ← (G(:, i)T G(:, i))−1 // Inverse Hermitian matrix (first iteration)
 8                   α ← H G(:, i)T b // Weights computed through least-squares
 9               else
10                   [α, H] ← LSTONER(α, H, G(:, z), G(:, i), b) // Least-squares via one-rank update, see Algorithm
                       8.
11               end
12               z ← z ∪ i ; y ← y \ i; // Move index i from y to z
13               n ← Indexes such that α n < 0 // Identify negative weights
14               if n ̸= ∅ then
15                    y ← y ∪ z(n); z ← z \ z(n) ; // Remove indexes negative weights
16                   H ← UPHERM(H, n) // Update inverse Hermitian Matrix (via recursive, one-rank operations, see
                       Algorithm 9)
17              α = H G(:, z)T b // Recalculate weights
18          end
19           r ← b − G(., z)α // Update the residual
20       end
         ωg ← αg W (z g ), g = 1, 2 . . . length(z)
                 √
21



Algorithm 8: Least-squares via one-rank update
 1 Function [α new , H new ] =LSTONER(α, H, A, a, b)
      Data: A ∈ R p×m , a ∈ R p , H = ( AT A)−1 , b ∈ R p , α = H AT b,
      Result: H new = (B T B)−1 and α new = H new B T b, where B = A
                                                                     [                     ]
                                                                                          a , via one-rank update.
 2    c = AT a;       d = H c;         s = ∥a∥2 − cT d
                        1    T     1
               [                      ]
                 H + s dd       −s d
 3    H new =
                   − 1s d T        1
                                   s
 4    r = b − Aα;          v = (a T r)/s
                α − vd
              [          ]
 5    α new =
                  v
   Having at hand matrix Υ ∈ Rm gs ×q , the error incurred in evaluating the internal forces for any training
configuration using the subset of integration points with indexes Z ⊂ ({1, 2 . . . M}) and associated positive weights
         ∗
α ∈ R+m gs is given by30
                     √
      e(α, Z) = ∥Υ T W − Υ T (:, Z)α∥.                                                                           (127)

         √   T
 30 If W√ Υ = 0, the problem becomes ill-posed (it admits the trivial solution α = 0). To eliminate the issue, it suffices to expand Υ as
Υ ← [Υ , W ] (consult Ref. [16] for further details).
48                   J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192


Algorithm 9: Update of the inverse of an Hermitian matrix when several columns are removed
 1 Function [H new ] =UPHERM(H, n)
      Data: H ∈ Rm×m , where H is of the form H = ( AT A)−1 , A ∈ R p×m ;      n ⊂ {1, 2 . . . m}
      Result: H new = (B T B)−1 , where B = A(:, c), c = {1, 2 . . . m} \ n
 2    n ← sort(n) // Sort the indexes in ascending order
 3    H new ← H
 4    for i = 1 to length(n) do
 5        j = n(i) − i + 1
 6        H new ← UPHERMone(H new , j) // Hermitian matrix inverse when 1 column is removed (Algorithm 10)
 7    end


Algorithm 10: Update of the inverse of an Hermitian matrix when one column is removed
 1 Function [C new ] =UPHERMone(C, j) // From https://emtiyaz.github.io/Writings/OneColInv.pdf
      Data: C ∈ Rm×m , where C is of the form C = ( AT A)−1 , A ∈ R p×m ;            j ∈ {1, 2 . . . m}
      Result: C new = (B T B)−1 , where B = A(:, c), c = {1, 2 . . . m} \ j
 2    D ← C; r ← {1, 2 . . . m − 1}
 3    if j < m then
 4         a ← {1, 2 . . . j − 1}; b ← { j + 1 . . . m}
                [                            ]          [                          ]
 5         D ← C(:, a) C(:, b) C(:, j) ; D ← D(a, :) D(b, :) D( j, :)
 6    end
                             D(r, m) D(m, r)
 7    C new = D(r, r) −
                                D(m, m)


Given a tolerance 0 ≤ ϵecm ≤ 1, we seek the smallest set of points Z and associated positive weights α such
that
          √                         √
      ∥G W − G(:, Z)α∥ ≤ ϵecm ∥G W ∥                                                                  (128)
                    √
where G = Υ (G W and G(:, Z)α represent the vectors of exact and approximate integrals, respectively). To
               T

solve this minimization problem, we use the function:
       [Z, ω] = ECM(G, W , ϵecm )                                                                                                 (129)
described in Algorithm 7. As pointed out previously, this (greedy) method is an algorithmically improved version
of the one put forward by the author in Ref [16]. The improvement goes as follows: at each iteration, the
algorithm has to cope with a least-squares problem to obtain the corresponding weights: α = ( AT A)−1 AT b, where
A = [G(:, z), G(:, i)] is the matrix of coefficients formed by incorporating the incoming column G(:, i). In principle,
this takes O(qm 2 ) floating-points operations (FLOPs), which implies that, at each iteration, the cost increases by a
factor O(m 2 ). This constitutes a serious bottleneck for high q, especially when m approaches q (the exact solution,
for ϵecm ≈ 0, is achieved for m = q, that is, when A becomes square). To amend this, we have modified the original
algorithm in Ref. [16]. Now the least-squares problem is solved using function LSTONER, described in Algorithm
8. This function performs a rank-one update of ( AT A)−1 using the formula31 for the inverse of a symmetric 2-by-2
block matrix (cf. Refs. [38,39]), which requires only O(qm) FLOPs. The same strategy is used for updating the
inverse of the Hermitian matrix upon removal of the columns with associated negative weights, see line 16 of
Algorithm 7.

 31 Alternatively, when the least-squares problem is solved using the QR decomposition, one can update the QR decomposition of
the coefficient matrix. This is the procedure followed by Lawson and Hanson in their pioneering Nonnegative Least-Squares (NNLS)
algorithm [35]. In this respect, Chapman et al. [36] has recently proposed a parallel updatable QR factorizer, which has been used in the
context of the energy-conserving sampling and weighting (ECSW) procedure [33,37].
                               J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                     49

Appendix B. Coarse-scale body forces
   The goal of this Section is to show how the expression for the coarse-scale body forces Fbe :
       Fbe = Fse
              e
                 + Feqe                                                                                                                  (130)
(see Eq. (67)) can be cast in a reduced-order format, without the need of having at one’s disposal the exact nodal
expression for the FE nodal external forces Fexe t .

B.1. Body forces

   The vector of FE nodal body forces may be expressed as
                  m gs
                  ∑
        Fbe =             N T(xg )Wg be (xg ),                                                                                           (131)
                  g=1

where N(xg ) is the shape function (in its global, sparse format) associated to the Gauss point located at xg and
be (xg ) the corresponding body force per unit volume. If self-weight (gravity) is the only body force, then we may
write Eq. (131) as
                  n∑
                   mat
                                        eT
        Fbe =             J kb ρ k Q̂ g,                                                                                                 (132)
                  k=1

where
                    m gs (k)
                     ∑
        J kb :=                N T(xg(k))Wg(k) .                                                                                         (133)
                     g=1

Here n mat is the number of distinct materials, ρk designates the density of the kth material and g ∈ Rn sd is the
vector of acceleration of gravity (in global coordinates).

B.2. Non-interface traction forces

   As for non-interface tractions, suppose that the non-interface boundary ∂ Ω̄non is subdivided into bnon portions.
In such a case, the expression for the FE nodal contribution can be written as
                         gs (k)
                  bnon m̄∑
                  ∑                     T
        Ft re =                      N̄ ( x̄g(k) )W̄ ( x̄g(k) )t e ( x̄g(k) ),                                                           (134)
                  k=1 g=1
           T
where N̄ ( x̄g(k) ) stands for the matrix of boundary shape functions at the (boundary) integration point x̄g(k) , W̄ ( x̄g(k) )
is the corresponding volumetric weight and t e ( x̄g(k) ) ∈ Rn sd the traction vector in the domain reference axes. In
the case of curved boundaries, the traction vector is often provided in the coordinate axes intrinsic to the surface:
t e ( x̄g(k) ) = Q ′ ( x̄g(k) )t ′e ( x̄g(k) ) (here Q ′ ( x̄g(k) ) is the local rotation matrix at the boundary integration point x̄g(k) ), and
Eq. (134) becomes expressible as
                  bnon
                  ∑
        Ft re =           J kt r t ′e(k) .                                                                                               (135)
                  k=1

where
                     m̄ gs (k)
                      ∑             T
        J kt r :=                N̄ ( x̄g(k) )W̄ ( x̄g(k) ) Q ′ ( x̄g(k) )                                                               (136)
                      g=1

In writing Eq. (135) we have assumed, without loss of generality, that the traction vector t ′e(k) is uniform over the
non-interface boundary ∂ Ω̄non
                           k
                               .
50                         J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192

B.3. Final expressions
                                                                                                                                        g
     Next we determine the self-equilibrating and resultant components of each of the n sd columns of J kb and J t r :
        J kb = J kb,se + J kb,eq                                                                                                      (137)
          g       g          g
        J t r = J t r,se + J t r,eq                                                                                                   (138)
where, according to Eq. (29):
        J kb,eq = R̄(R T R̄)−1 (R T J kb ),                 J kb,se = J kb − J kb,eq                                                  (139)
          g                            g                       g          g       g
        J t r,eq = R̄(R T R̄)−1 (R T J t r ),                J t r,se = J t r − J t r,eq                                              (140)
                                                                                                                    g                       k
Using Eq. (58) and Eq. (69) we can readily compute the coarse-scale counterparts of J kb and J t r , denoted by N T
      Tg
and N̄ , respectively, by:
             T
        N k = V T QT (Pf J kb,eq ) + (T T H −1 Φ T ) J kb,se ,                     k = 1, 2 . . . n mat                               (141)
             gT
        N̄        = V T QT (Pf J kt r,eq ) + (T T H −1 Φ T ) J kt r,se ,               g = 1, 2 . . . bnon                            (142)
                          g
With N k and N̄ at hand, the expression for the coarse-scale body forces can be finally expressed as
                   n∑
                    mat                        bnon
                              T       eT       ∑           g T ′e(g)
        Fbe =             N k (ρ k Q̂ g) +            N̄      t        .                                                              (143)
                   k=1                         g=1

According to the preceding equation, to compute the vector of coarse-scale body forces Fbe of each subdomain Ω e ,
one only has to specify the density ρ k of the distinct materials forming the unit cell (k = 1, 2 . . . n emat ); the orientation
                                                     e
of the subdomain (through the rotation matrix Q̂ ∈ Rn sd ×n sd ); and the traction vectors t ′e(k) ∈ Rn sd acting on each
                                                                                                       g
of the bnon non-interface boundaries of the unit cell. The reduced-order matrices N k and N̄ depend only on the
geometry and basis modes of the unit cell, and hence they can be precomputed in the offline phase.

References
 [1] O. Lloberas-Valls, D. Rixen, A. Simone, L. Sluys, Multiscale domain decomposition analysis of quasi-brittle heterogeneous materials,
     Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. (2011).
 [2] M. Geers, V. Kouznetsova, W. Brekelmans, Multi-scale computational homogenization: Trends and challenges, J. Comput. Appl. Math.
     234 (7) (2010) 2175–2182.
 [3] F. Feyel, J. Chaboche, FE-2 multiscale approach for modelling the elastoviscoplastic behaviour of long fibre SiC/Ti composite materials,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 183 (3) (2000) 309–330.
 [4] G. Dvorak, A. Wafa, Y. Bahei-El-Din, Implementation of the transformation field analysis for inelastic composite materials, Comput.
     Mech. 14 (3) (1994) 201–228.
 [5] J. Fish, K. Shek, M. Pandheeradi, M. Shephard, Computational plasticity for composite structures based on mathematical
     homogenization: Theory and practice, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 148 (1–2) (1997) 53–73.
 [6] J.A. Hernández, J. Oliver, A.E. Huespe, M.A. Caicedo, J.C. Cante, High-performance model reduction techniques in computational
     multiscale homogenization, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 276 (2014) 149–189.
 [7] M. Ashby, Physical modelling of materials problems, Mater. Sci. Technol. 8 (2) (1992) 102–111.
 [8] K. Park, C.A. Felippa, A variational framework for solution method developments in structural mechanics, J. Appl. Mech. 65 (1)
     (1998) 242–249.
 [9] K. Park, C.A. Felippa, A variational principle for the formulation of partitioned structural systems, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg.
     47 (1–3) (2000) 395–418.
[10] J. Oliver, M. Caicedo, A. Huespe, J. Hernández, E. Roubin, Reduced order modeling strategies for computational multiscale fracture,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 313 (2017) 560–595.
[11] M. Caicedo, J.L. Mroginski, S. Toro, M. Raschi, A. Huespe, J. Oliver, High performance reduced order modeling techniques based
     on optimal energy quadrature: application to geometrically non-linear multiscale inelastic material modeling, Arch. Comput. Methods
     Eng. 26 (4) (2019) 771–792.
[12] I. Rocha, F. van der Meer, L. Sluys, Efficient micromechanical analysis of fiber-reinforced composites subjected to cyclic loading
     through time homogenization and reduced-order modeling, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 345 (2019) 644–670.
[13] B. Brands, D. Davydov, J. Mergheim, P. Steinmann, Reduced-order modelling and homogenisation in magneto-mechanics: A numerical
     comparison of established hyper-reduction methods, Math. Comput. Appl. 24 (1) (2019) 20.
[14] R.R. Craig Jr., M.C. Bampton, Coupling of substructures for dynamic analyses, AIAA J. 6 (7) (1968) 1313–1319.
[15] D.J. Rixen, A dual Craig–Bampton method for dynamic substructuring, J. Comput. Appl. Math. 168 (1) (2004) 383–391.
                     J.A. Hernández / Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 368 (2020) 113192                             51

[16] J.A. Hernández, M.A. Caicedo, A. Ferrer, Dimensional hyper-reduction of nonlinear finite element models via empirical cubature,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 313 (2017) 687–722.
[17] P. Kerfriden, O. Goury, T. Rabczuk, S.P.-A. Bordas, A partitioned model order reduction approach to rationalise computational expenses
     in nonlinear fracture mechanics, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 256 (2013) 169–188.
[18] Y. Efendiev, J. Galvis, T. Hou, Generalized multiscale finite element methods (GMsFEM), 2012.
[19] T. Kirchdoerfer, M. Ortiz, Data-driven computational mechanics, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 304 (2016) 81–101.
[20] L. Hogben, Handbook of Linear Algebra, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2006.
[21] G.H. Golub, C.F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations, Vol. 3, JHU Press, 2012.
[22] M. Barrault, Y. Maday, N. Nguyen, A. Patera, An empirical interpolation’method: application to efficient reduced-basis discretization
     of partial differential equations, C. R. Math. 339 (9) (2004) 667–672.
[23] S. Chaturantabut, D. Sorensen, Discrete empirical interpolation for nonlinear model reduction, in: Decision and Control, 2009 Held
     Jointly with the 2009 28th Chinese Control Conference. CDC/CCC 2009. Proceedings of the 48th IEEE Conference on, IEEE, 2010,
     pp. 4316–4321.
[24] R. Cook, Finite Element Modeling for Stress Analysis, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1995.
[25] P.K.V. Nukala, D.W. White, A mixed finite element for three-dimensional nonlinear analysis of steel frames, Comput. Methods Appl.
     Mech. Engrg. 193 (23–26) (2004) 2507–2545.
[26] G. Salmon, J.E. Johnson, F.A. Malhas, Steel Structures: Design and Behavior, fourth ed., Editorial Harper Collins, 1996.
[27] W. Lacarbonara, A. Paolone, On solution strategies to Saint–Venant problem, J. Comput. Appl. Math. 206 (1) (2007) 473–497.
[28] M.H. Sadd, Elasticity: Theory, Applications, and Numerics, Academic Press, 2009.
[29] L.J. Gibson, M.F. Ashby, Cellular Solids: Structure and Properties, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[30] J.C. Simo, T.J.R. Hughes, Computational Inelasticity, Springer, New York, 1998.
[31] C. Felippa, B. Haugen, A unified formulation of small-strain corotational finite elements: I. Theory, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech.
     Engrg. 194 (21) (2005) 2285–2335.
[32] D. Millán, M. Arroyo, Nonlinear manifold learning for model reduction in finite elastodynamics, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.
     (2013).
[33] C. Farhat, P. Avery, T. Chapman, J. Cortial, Dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models with finite rotations and
     energy-based mesh sampling and weighting for computational efficiency, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 98 (9) (2014) 625–662.
[34] M. Yano, A.T. Patera, An LP empirical quadrature procedure for reduced basis treatment of parametrized nonlinear PDEs, Comput.
     Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 344 (2019) 1104–1123.
[35] C.L. Lawson, R.J. Hanson, Solving Least Squares Problems, Vol. 15, Siam, 1995.
[36] T. Chapman, P. Avery, P. Collins, C. Farhat, Accelerated mesh sampling for the hyper reduction of nonlinear computational models,
     Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 109 (12) (2017) 1623–1654.
[37] C. Farhat, T. Chapman, P. Avery, Structure-preserving, stability, and accuracy properties of the energy-conserving sampling and weighting
     method for the hyper reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 102 (5) (2015)
     1077–1110.
[38] S. Boyd, L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization, Cambridge Univ Pr, 2004.
[39] W.W. Hager, Updating the inverse of a matrix, SIAM Rev. 31 (2) (1989) 221–239.
