                                                           J. Mech. Phys. Solids 159 (2022) 104703


                                                          Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids
                                                  journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jmps




Polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity with neural networks
Dominik K. Klein a ,∗, Mauricio Fernández b , Robert J. Martin c , Patrizio Neff c ,
Oliver Weeger a
a Cyber-Physical Simulation Group, Department of Mechanical Engineering & Centre for Computational Engineering,

Technical University of Darmstadt, Dolivostr. 15, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany
b Access e.V., Intzestr. 5, 52072 Aachen, Germany
c
  Chair for Nonlinear Analysis and Modeling, Faculty of Mathematics, University of
Duisburg–Essen, Thea-Leymann-Str. 9, 45127 Essen, Germany



ARTICLE               INFO                              ABSTRACT

Dataset link: https://github.com/CPShub/sim-            In the present work, two machine learning based constitutive models for finite deformations
data                                                    are proposed. Using input convex neural networks, the models are hyperelastic, anisotropic
Keywords:                                               and fulfill the polyconvexity condition, which implies ellipticity and thus ensures material
Constitutive modeling                                   stability. The first constitutive model is based on a set of polyconvex, anisotropic and objective
Nonlinear elasticity                                    invariants. The second approach is formulated in terms of the deformation gradient, its cofactor
Anisotropic hyperelasticity                             and determinant, uses group symmetrization to fulfill the material symmetry condition, and
Polyconvexity                                           data augmentation to fulfill objectivity approximately. The extension of the dataset for the data
Ellipticity                                             augmentation approach is based on mechanical considerations and does not require additional
Material stability                                      experimental or simulation data. The models are calibrated with highly challenging simulation
Soft materials
                                                        data of cubic lattice metamaterials, including finite deformations and lattice instabilities. A
Metamaterials
                                                        moderate amount of calibration data is used, based on deformations which are commonly
Invariants
Structural tensors                                      applied in experimental investigations. While the invariant-based model shows drawbacks
Parameter identification                                for several deformation modes, the model based on the deformation gradient alone is able
Data-driven modeling                                    to reproduce and predict the effective material behavior very well and exhibits excellent
Machine learning                                        generalization capabilities. In addition, the models are calibrated with transversely isotropic
Input convex neural networks                            data, generated with an analytical polyconvex potential. For this case, both models show
                                                        excellent results, demonstrating the straightforward applicability of the polyconvex neural
                                                        network constitutive models to other symmetry groups.




1. Introduction

     In the last decades, a vast amount of highly specialized materials has been developed and, with advancing requirements
in engineering applications, the trend is growing. In particular, with recent advances in additive and advanced manufacturing
technologies, flexible and functional mechanical metamaterials and composites are being developed (Surjadi et al., 2019). As a
consequence, numerous constitutive models have been formulated, each specifically designed for the mechanical characteristics of
a comparatively small class of (soft) materials (Chagnon et al., 2015; Xiang et al., 2020). However, while the specific formulations
may be different, the theoretical considerations that lead to physically sensible and mathematically well-posed models stay the same,
i.e., ellipticity, thermodynamic consistency, objectivity, material symmetry, etc. (Holzapfel, 2000).


  ∗ Corresponding author.
     E-mail address: klein@cps.tu-darmstadt.de (D.K. Klein).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2021.104703
Received 20 June 2021; Received in revised form 29 October 2021; Accepted 29 October 2021
Available online 20 November 2021
0022-5096/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                   Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


     Recent progress in the field of machine learning (ML) has sparked the development of data-driven numerical methods that avoid
the explicit formulation of constitutive models and purely operate on discrete stress–strain data (Carrara et al., 2020; Kirchdoerfer
and Ortiz, 2016; Nguyen and Keip, 2018), as well as of data-driven constitutive models that employ reduced bases (Fritzen et al.,
2019; Fritzen and Kunc, 2018; Yvonnet and He, 2007), polynomials (Khajehtourian and Kochmann, 2020; Yvonnet et al., 2009), or
artificial neural networks (ANNs) (Flaschel et al., 2021; Le et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019) for the representations of
nonlinear energy potentials or stress–strain relationships. In particular, the latter approach offers a high flexibility and applicability
to a wide range of materials due to the universal approximation properties of ANNs (Hornik, 1991). Furthermore, they can also be
formulated to fulfill important material theoretical considerations, e.g., the material symmetry condition (Fernández et al., 2021b;
Linka et al., 2020). In González et al. (2019), an analytical model was extended using ML methods. While preserving favorable
properties of the analytical model, the ML extension can improve the models performance and, thus, the applicability to different
materials, which is shown in González et al. (2020) for vascular soft tissues. In Fernández et al. (2021b), two anisotropic material
models for finite deformations are proposed. The first model is based on an analytical model (Itskov, 2001), whose function space
is extended using ANNs. While preserving favorable analytical properties of the model, the flexibility is significantly improved. For
the second approach, the method of group symmetrization is introduced to fulfill the material symmetry. With the six independent
components of the right Cauchy–Green tensor 𝐶 = 𝐹 𝑇 𝐹 as input quantity for an ANN, the model offers a highly flexible, objective
hyperelastic potential, which is able to reproduce the challenging effective behavior of cubic beam-lattice metamaterials, including
lattice instabilities. The model proposed by Linka et al. (2020) uses structural tensors, c.f. Zheng and Spencer (1993), processed
through ANNs, to formulate a set of invariants reflecting the intrinsic material anisotropy and, using these invariants as input for
another ANN, predicts the potential of the hyperelastic structure. By using a Lagrangian multiplier to enforce incompressibility,
c.f. Holzapfel (2000, Section 6.3), the model is applicable to elastomeric material behavior, and shows excellent results for Treloar’s
experimental data on vulcanized rubber. Both the models introduced in Fernández et al. (2021b) and Linka et al. (2020) include the
objectivity and material symmetry condition in their formulation. In Heider et al. (2020), a neural network based constitutive model
for anisotropic elastoplastic materials is proposed, and different methods are examined to fulfill the objectivity condition, e.g., the
representation of stress and strain tensors in their spectral decomposition for the input and output data of the neural network.
     In the context of finite elasticity theory, existence and stability of solutions for boundary-value problems are strongly linked to
the notion of polyconvexity introduced by Ball (1977, 1976). From a material theory point of view, polyconvexity is advantageous
since it implies ellipticity of the corresponding constitutive model, while being more straightforward to include into the model
formulation than the ellipticity condition itself. Ellipticity ensures material stability (Neff et al., 2015; Zee and Sternberg, 1983),
and is thus important for numerical applications such as the finite element method. As will be shown for the model of Fernández
et al. (2021b), the polyconvexity condition is easily violated when using unrestricted ANNs without caution. As this may lead to
a loss of ellipticity and thus to material instability, the polyconvexity condition should be treated with special care in the model
formulation.
     The theoretical aspects of polyconvexity are still subject to current research (Ghiba et al., 2018; Martin et al., 2020a,b), and the
formulation of polyconvex models remains a challenging task (Martin et al., 2018, 2019). For a long time after its initial conception,
the polyconvexity condition was practically restricted to isotropic material response, as no anisotropic formulation was available
that ensured at the same time: polyconvexity, objecticity, material symmetry and a stress-free reference configuration. In fact, the
fulfillment of multiple constitutive requirements at the same time can be seen as ‘‘the main open problem of the theory of material
behavior’’, c.f. Truesdell and Noll (2004, Section 20). In a landmark paper, Schröder and Neff (2003) derived a formulation which
fulfills all of the former mentioned requirements, quickly followed by Ehret and Itskov (2007), Hartmann and Neff (2003), Itskov
and Aksel (2004), Kambouchev et al. (2007), Schröder (2010), Schröder et al. (2005) and Schröder et al. (2008). It was shown
that questions of material stability could neatly be avoided while being able to match experimental data (Balzani et al., 2006). The
approaches are based on second and fourth order structural tensors, which can reproduce a wide range of anisotropies. Combining
the structural tensors with the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor, sets of invariants can be derived. By a suitable construction
of polynomials of these invariants, constitutive models can be created which fulfill all of the former mentioned restrictions. By using
polyconvex invariants instead of non-polyconvex invariants, constitutive models can be improved (Cai et al., 2021). Subsequently,
also finite strain finite element methods tailored to the discretization of polyconvex material models were developed (Bonet et al.,
2015; Pfefferkorn and Betsch, 2019).
     It must be emphasized, however, that the polyconvexity condition is a purely mathematical framework that ensures ellipticity,
but unlike ellipticity, to the best knowledge of the authors, is not a fundamental physical requirement. For example, polyconvexity
imposes restrictions upon arbitrarily large strains that will never occur in actual experiments. Here, we adopt polyconvexity as
a suitable means to ensure overall material stability, i.e., to avoid loss of ellipticity. Otherwise, this would be cumbersome to be
checked a posteriori. Note that the only real physical requirement is satisfaction of ellipticity in a compact set including the identity.
But even this can be very challenging without polyconvexity (Neff et al., 2016, 2015).
     Coming back to the field of ML, the difficulty of formulating physically sensible models, e.g., material models which fulfill
multiple constitutive requirements, is still an open problem (E et al., 2020; Karniadakis et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020; Willard
et al., 2020). Several constitutive modeling approaches found in the literature consider convexity properties, however, none of
them known to the authors fulfills the polyconvexity condition. In Ghaderi et al. (2020), an attempt is made to formulate polyconvex
potentials based on ANNs. However, for the neural network core, non-convex activation functions are used such as the hyperbolic
tangent, and consequently, the potential proposed in Ghaderi et al. (2020) violates the polyconvexity condition, which follows from
Corollary A.4. In Vlassis et al. (2020), a feed-forward neural network (FFNN) based hyperelastic model for anisotropic material
behavior is proposed, and the convexity of the resulting potential w.r.t. the right Cauchy–Green tensor 𝐶 is examined for a special

                                                                    2
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                   Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


material. However, while the potentials are convex in 𝐶 for some examined deformation modes, the model only approximates the
convexity condition and, consequently, it may be violated for other deformations. Furthermore, convexity in 𝐶 does not ensure
polyconvexity, as not all components of 𝐶 are convex in the deformation gradient 𝐹 . Therefore, convexity in 𝐶 does not imply
ellipticity, and exhibits no physical significance at all. The constitutive model proposed in Xu et al. (2021) identifies the Cholesky
factor of a tangent stiffness matrix to describe the behavior of the material. By using symmetric positive definite neural networks, the
formulation is closely linked to convex potentials, and numerical robustness of the model is ensured. While the model was able to
predict both time-dependent and plastic problems, it requires a large amount of data for the calibration. A FFNN based constitutive
model for nearly incompressible anisotropic hyperelasticity is proposed in Tac et al. (2021). By using additional terms in the objective
function which enforce semi positive-definiteness of the FFNN’s Hessian, the neural network is approximately convex. However, the
polyconvexity of the invariants which are used as input quantities for the neural network is not examined. For example, the invariant
        (     )2
𝐼̄2 = 21 tr 𝐶̄ − 12 tr 𝐶̄ 2 with 𝐶̄ = 𝐽 −2∕3 𝐶 is not polyconvex (Hartmann and Neff, 2003, Lemma 2.4). Therefore, in Tac et al. (2021),
the polyconvexity condition is violated by the choice of input arguments.
    In the present work, two polyconvex constitutive models are introduced, which are both based on input convex neural networks
(ICNNs), see Amos et al. (2017), and formulated for hyperelastic, anisotropic material behavior and finite deformations. ICNNs
are a special class of FFNNs which are, through a suitable network architecture, constructed as convex functions. As already
discussed, there is a variety of data-driven or machine learning methods which are used for constitutive modeling. However, for
the construction of polyconvex potentials, convex FFNNs (̂   = ICNNs) are a very natural choice, as the simple mathematical structure
of FFNNs offers a straightforward application of analytically received convexity conditions, c.f. Appendix. While there are several
applications for ICNNs in, e.g., convex optimization (Amos et al., 2017; Calafiore et al., 2020a,b), the application towards polyconvex
constitutive models has, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, not been studied yet. The first model developed in this work is
based on a set of invariants already introduced in Schröder et al. (2010), which fulfills the objectivity and material symmetry
condition by construction. Using ICNNs, substantially more complex functions for the potential compared to polynomial approaches
can be created, while preserving the polyconvexity of the model. While this model can be seen as a straightforward extension
of invariant-polynomials to the more flexible function space ANNs offer, the second constitutive model is specifically designed
for machine learning. Formulated directly in the deformation gradient, its cofactor and determinant, the objectivity condition is
not fulfilled by construction. That objectivity, i.e., invariance of the energy 𝑊 (𝑄 𝐹 ) = 𝑊 (𝐹 ) under rotations 𝑄 ∈ SO(3), is not
automatically satisfied, may be surprising at first glance. Usually, hyperelastic formulations come with objectivity built in a priori.
Indeed, objectivity is not derived from an experimental observation, but is a physical law, c.f. sections 17 and 19 in Truesdell and
Noll (2004). However, in consideration of a useful model for a compact set of deformation gradients 𝐹 = 𝐷𝜑, the possible error
in not exactly satisfying objectivity remains controllable. The benefit in giving up exact objectivity is the increased flexibility in
combining all the needed constitutive requirements. We remind that the major obstacle in originally extending polyconvexity to the
anisotropic setting was coming from exact objectivity combined with the stress-free reference configuration and material symmetry.
Here, the objectivity condition is approximated using data augmentation, following Ling et al. (2016). The approach is based on
mechanical considerations, and requires no further simulation or experimental data. The anisotropy is taken into account with the
group symmetrization already introduced in Fernández et al. (2021b).
    Both models can be calibrated with a moderate amount of data, which is shown for the highly challenging behavior of cubic
beam-lattice metamaterials, using synthetic homogenization data. Modern additive and advanced manufacturing methods allow
for a variety of tailored materials with specifically designed microstructure, consisting of, e.g., beams and shells, which leads to
mechanical characteristics not encountered in classical materials, e.g., due to lattice instabilities within the microstructures (Bertoldi
et al., 2017; Glaesener et al., 2020; Jiang, 2016; Khajehtourian and Kochmann, 2021; Lee et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2016). Nonlinear
multiscale simulations for this class of metamaterials can be executed by homogenizing the microstructure (Matous et al., 2016)
either in a current multiscale setting using the FE2 method (Glaesener et al., 2020), or sequentially based on the formulation of
an effective constitutive model (Fernández et al., 2021b; Jamshidian et al., 2020; Khajehtourian and Kochmann, 2020), as applied
here.
    The outline of the manuscript is as follows. In Section 2, the present work starts with a short introduction to the basics of
constitutive modeling relevant to this work. In Section 3, the lack of polyconvexity for models with unrestricted ANN architecture
is discussed, and the two polyconvex ML based models are introduced. Finally, in Section 4, the models are calibrated to the highly
challenging, homogenized behavior of cubic lattice metamaterials and compared with each other and to a conventional polyconvex
model. The application to another material symmetry, i.e., transverse isotropy, is demonstrated in Section 5. In Section 6, some
issues raised by the use of ML techniques in nonlinear elasticity theory are discussed. After the conclusion in Section 7, some
general properties of ICNNs are introduced and discussed in the Appendix.

Notation. Throughout this work, tensor compositions and contractions are denoted by (𝐴 𝐵)𝑖𝑗 = 𝐴𝑖𝑘 𝐵𝑘𝑗 , 𝑎 ⋅ 𝑏 = 𝑎𝑖 𝑏𝑖 = ⟨𝑎, 𝑏⟩,
𝐴 ∶ 𝐵 = 𝐴𝑖𝑗 𝐵𝑖𝑗 and (A ∶ 𝐴)𝑖𝑗 = A𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 𝐴𝑘𝑙 , respectively, with vectors 𝑎 and 𝑏, second order tensors 𝐴 and 𝐵 and fourth order
tensor A. The tensor product is denoted by ⊗, the second order identity tensor by 1. The first Fréchet derivative of a function
𝑓 w.r.t. 𝑋 is denoted by 𝐷𝑋 𝑓 , the second Fréchet derivative (or Hessian) is denoted by 𝐷𝑋    2 𝑓 . For the function composition

𝑓 (𝑔(𝑥)) the compact notation 𝑓 ◦𝑔◦𝑥 is applied. The set of invertible second order tensors with positive determinant is denoted
              {                    }                                                 {                                }
by GL+ (3) ∶= 𝑋 ∈ R3×3 | det 𝑋 > 0 , the special orthogonal group in R3 by SO(3) ∶= 𝑋 ∈ R3×3 | 𝑋 𝑇 𝑋 = 1, det 𝑋 = 1 .

                                                                    3
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                    Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


2. Basics of material theory

      The hyperelastic potential

         𝑊 ∶ GL+ (3) → R ,           𝐹 ↦ 𝑊 (𝐹 )                                                                                                 (1)

corresponds to the strain energy density stored in the body 𝛺 ⊂            R3 due to the deformation 𝜑 ∶ 𝛺 → R3 , and depends on the
deformation gradient 𝐹 = 𝐷𝜑 (Holzapfel, 2000). To ensure a physically sensible and mathematically well-posed formulation, several
restrictions on the potential must be considered. The restrictions relevant to the present work are shortly introduced in the following:
    The reference configuration of the body must be stress-free, i.e., for the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress

         𝑆 = 𝐷𝐹 𝑊 (𝐹 )                                                                                                                          (2)

it holds that 𝑆(1) = 0 (Holzapfel, 2000). In fact, this is implied by the condition that the potential (1) attains its unique, global
minimum at the identity, i.e., 𝑊 (1) = 0 and 𝑊 (𝐹 ) ≥ 0 (Holzapfel, 2000). The principle of objectivity (Truesdell and Noll, 2004)
states that the material behavior has to be independent of the observer, which means that the potential is invariant under the
transformation

         𝑊 (𝑄 𝐹 ) = 𝑊 (𝐹 )        ∀𝐹 ∈ GL+ (3) , 𝑄 ∈ SO(3) .                                                                                    (3)

Following (2), this implies the invariance of the stress tensor under transformations according to

         𝑆(𝑄 𝐹 ) = 𝑄 𝑆(𝐹 )        ∀𝐹 ∈ GL+ (3) , 𝑄 ∈ SO(3) .                                                                                    (4)

For models formulated in terms of the right Cauchy–Green tensor 𝐶 = 𝐹 𝑇 𝐹 , i.e., as 𝑊 = 𝑊 (𝐶), the material objectivity condition is
automatically fulfilled, which is an advantage compared to models depending directly on the deformation gradient. For anisotropic
materials with symmetry group  ⊂ SO(3), the strain energy must be invariant under the symmetry transformation (Haupt, 2002)

         𝑊 (𝐹 𝑄) = 𝑊 (𝐹 )         ∀𝐹 ∈ GL+ (3) , 𝑄 ∈  ⊂ SO(3) ,                                                                                (5)

which implies the stress invariance condition

         𝑆(𝐹 𝑄) = 𝑆(𝐹 ) 𝑄 ∀𝐹 ∈ GL+ (3) , 𝑄 ∈  ⊂ SO(3) .                                                                                        (6)

      The growth condition
                                                (                  )
                                                          1
         𝑊 (𝐹 ) → ∞ as        det 𝐹 → 0+            ⇔         →∞                                                                                (7)
                                                        det 𝐹
captures the physical consideration that for infinitely large volumetric compression, an infinite amount of energy is required. There
are several other growth conditions known in constitutive modeling, which regard the material behavior for very large deformations
and are often referred to as coercivity conditions. 1 However, while the case of large volumetric compression (7) is important to
consider especially for highly compressible materials, coercivity conditions regard material behavior which usually lies outside the
considered deformation modes. Therefore, they are of rather theoretical interest, and will not be considered throughout this work.
   In finite elasticity theory, the existence of minimizers for the underlying variational functionals is guaranteed if the energy
potential (1) fulfills the polyconvexity condition introduced by Ball (1977, 1976) and an additional coercivity condition (Kružík
                                         ( )
and Roubíček, 2019). The potential 𝑊 𝐹 is polyconvex if and only if there exists a function  ∶ R3×3 × R3×3 × R → R such that

         𝑊 (𝐹 ) = (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ) ,                                                                                                       (8)

so that  is convex in its arguments (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ). The function  is in general non-unique (Schröder and Neff, 2003). Due to
the reason mentioned above, the coercivity condition is not considered in this work. For convex functions which are sufficiently
smooth, the Hessian matrix is positive semi-definite (Silhavy, 2014), and the polyconvexity condition can be formulated as

         𝛿𝜉 ⋅ 𝐷𝜉2 (𝜉) ⋅ 𝛿𝜉 ≥ 0     ∀ 𝜉, 𝛿𝜉 ,                                                                                                   (9)

with the rearranged arguments 𝜉 = (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ) ∈ R19 and 𝛿𝜉 ∈ R19 (Ebbing, 2010). From this point on, the notation
𝜉 = (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ) ∈ R19 will be used to address the argument in the polyconvexity contexts more compactly. Polyconvexity
implies ellipticity, while being more straightforward to include into the model formulation than the ellipticity condition itself. The
ellipticity (or rank-one convexity) condition (Neff et al., 2015; Zee and Sternberg, 1983)

         (𝑎 ⊗ 𝑏) ∶ 𝐷𝐹2 𝑊 (𝐹 ) ∶ (𝑎 ⊗ 𝑏) ≥ 0         ∀ 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ R3                                                                                (10)

ensures material stability of the constitutive model.



  1   For a coercive function, 𝑓 (𝑥) → ∞ as ‖𝑥‖ → ∞ holds.


                                                                       4
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


3. Polyconvex constitutive models based on FFNNs

    Feed-forward neural networks (FFNNs) are universal approximators (Hornik, 1991), meaning that they can represent continuous
functions of arbitrary complexity. FFNN based constitutive models exploit this important property by using them as highly flexible
functions within the model formulations, e.g., to represent the energy potential 𝑊 defined in (1). This is in contrast to conventional
approaches, which rely on a human choice for the representation of 𝑊 , thus potentially reducing the possible function space.
Furthermore, through the right choice of network architecture, FFNNs can be constructed as convex functions, which is an often
required property in the context of constitutive modeling.
    In finite elasticity theory, the construction of potentials which are convex in the deformation gradient, its cofactor and
determinant is of special interest, which is referred to as polyconvexity (Ball, 1976). By using convex FFNNs, i.e., ICNNs, hyperelastic
potentials can be generated which satisfy the polyconvexity condition, see (8). Polyconvexity implies ellipticity, and thus ensures
material stability of the constitutive models. The convexity condition is not trivially fulfilled by arbitrary FFNNs. Consequently, for
FFNN based models found in the literature a loss of polyconvexity can often be detected, which may lead to a loss of ellipticity and
thus material instability. This is now discussed for the approach of Fernández et al. (2021b).
    Fernández et al. (2021b) introduced several ML based constitutive models, from which we will examine the potential model.
The model uses a FFNN core for the hyperelastic potential, with the right Cauchy–Green tensor 𝐶 = 𝐹 𝑇 𝐹 as input, and fulfills the
material symmetry condition (5) with a group symmetrization of the potential, see Eq. (20). With the six independent components
of 𝐶 as input, the model fulfills the objectivity condition (3) per construction. The internal FFNN used in this work is built upon
multiple compositions of the Softplus function, cf. (A.12), with unrestricted weights. This model violates the polyconvexity condition
in two aspects. First of all, only the principal diagonal elements of the right Cauchy–Green tensor 𝐶 are convex in the deformation
gradient 𝐹 , while the remaining elements of 𝐶 are neither convex nor concave.2 Additionally, compositions of Softplus functions
with arbitrary parameters are not convex, as is discussed in Corollaries A.4 and A.8 in the Appendix. Furthermore, while the
metamaterials under consideration in Fernández et al. (2021b) are highly compressible, the volume compression condition (7) is
not considered in the model formulation. Therefore the model does not ensure a physical sensible behavior for the limiting case of
infinitely large volumetric compression.
    A brief introduction to convex FFNNs, i.e., ICNNs, and the notation used throughout this work can be found in the Appendix.
In Corollaries A.4 and A.6 the standard conditions for the fulfillment of convexity are provided. Activation functions fulfilling
these conditions are presented in Theorem A.7 and Corollary A.8. These activation functions lead to the ICNN cores discussed in
Proposition A.9. In a nutshell, an ICNN is easily constructed based on standard FFNNs with input vector 𝑋 based on the following
restrictions:

      • the first hidden layer 𝐴1 is neuron-wise convex with respect to 𝑋 (e.g., by employing convex activation functions as Softplus,
        𝑠(𝑥) = log(1 + exp(𝑥)), in each neuron)
      • from the second 𝐴2 to the last hidden layer 𝐴𝐻 , each hidden layer is neuron-wise convex and non-decreasing with respect to
        the previous hidden layer (e.g., by employing 𝑠(𝑥) with non-negative weights in each neuron)
      • the scalar-valued output layer 𝑎 is convex and non-decreasing with respect to the last hidden layer.

These restrictions imply that the composition 𝑎◦𝐴𝐻 ◦ … ◦𝐴2 ◦𝐴1 ◦𝑋 = 𝑎(𝑋)
                                                                      ̄   is convex in 𝑋. These architectures are shortly denoted
as ICNNs from now on. For several passages, the abbreviation  = 𝐴𝐻 ◦ … ◦𝐴1 will be used for the core (i.e., the hidden layers) of
the ICNN. The collection of all weights and biases of the ICNN will be abbreviated by the internal parameter vector 𝑝.
    We now present two polyconvex ICNN-based approaches for anisotropic hyperelastic constitutive modeling, extending the works
of Schröder et al. (2010) and Fernández et al. (2021b).

3.1. Model based on invariants

Polyconvex model based on invariants. In Schröder et al. (2010), a polyconvex potential for trigonal, tetragonal and cubic symmetry
groups is proposed, see also (Ebbing, 2010). In the following, we will shortly describe the cubic potential. It is formulated in
polynomials of invariants, which are based on a combination of the right Cauchy–Green tensor and an anisotropic structural tensor.
The fourth order tensor G is called a structural tensor of the material symmetry group  ⊂ SO(3) if

         G = 𝑄 ∗ G ∀ 𝑄 ∈  ⊂ SO(3) ,                                                                                                                       (11)

where ∗ denotes the Rayleigh product (Bertram, 2021). For some material symmetry groups, second order structural tensors are
sufficient to represent the symmetry, while for other symmetries, the introduction of fourth or sixth order tensors is required (Zheng
and Spencer, 1993). For cubic symmetry, a fourth-order structural tensor is required. In Schröder et al. (2010), the fourth order
structural tensor
                    ∑
                    3
         Gcub =           𝑒𝑖 ⊗ 𝑒𝑖 ⊗ 𝑒𝑖 ⊗ 𝑒𝑖                                                                                                                (12)
                    𝑖=1



  2   This does not mean that objectivity and polyconvexity contradict each other, it rather shows how challenging it is to combine both requirements.


                                                                              5
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                   Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


is used for the cubic group 7 , with 𝑒𝑖 being the basis vectors of a Cartesian coordinate system. A description of the cubic group 7
can be found in Ebbing (2010, Section 3.7). Using the structural tensor (12), a set of five polyconvex invariants can be derived as
        𝐼1 = tr 𝐶 ,              𝐼2 = tr (Cof 𝐶) ,           𝐼3 = det 𝐶 ,
                                                                                                                                              (13)
           𝐽7 = 𝐶 ∶ Gcub ∶ 𝐶 ,                𝐽11 = Cof 𝐶 ∶ Gcub ∶ Cof 𝐶 .
The first three invariants are the well-known isotropic invariants, while the remaining two invariants possess the cubic symmetry.
The invariants 𝐼1 and 𝐽7 are convex in 𝐹 , the invariants 𝐼2 and 𝐽11 are convex in Cof 𝐹 , and the invariant 𝐼3 is convex in det 𝐹 . Since
the invariants are formulated in the right Cauchy–Green tensor, they fulfill the principle of objectivity. Based on these invariants,
Schröder et al. (2010) proposed the potential
                  ∑𝑛 (                                                                      )
          SNE               1       (𝛼 +1)       3       (𝛽 +1)      1       (𝜂 +1) 9 −𝛾
       𝑊cub   =𝜅                𝛼
                                   𝐼1 𝑟 +            𝛽
                                                        𝐼2 𝑟 +           𝜂
                                                                            𝐽7 𝑟 + 𝐼3 𝑟 ,                                             (14)
                  𝑟=1
                       (𝛼𝑟 + 1)3 𝑟          (𝛽𝑟 + 1)3 𝑟         (𝜂𝑟 + 1)3 𝑟         𝛾𝑟

where we introduced the additional parameter 𝜅. With 𝜅 > 0, 𝛼𝑟 , 𝛽𝑟 , 𝜂𝑟 ≥ 0 and 𝛾𝑟 ≥ −1∕2, 𝛾𝑟 ≠ 0, the potential is polyconvex,
coercive and has a stress-free reference configuration.

Extension with neural networks. A vector of group specific objective invariants (𝜉) is defined, where each component of (𝜉) is
convex in 𝜉, i.e., (𝜉) is a polyconvex vector-valued function. For instance,  = (𝐼1 , 𝐼2 , 𝐼3 , 𝐽7 , 𝐽11 ) can be considered for cubic
materials. This motivates the model

        0 (𝜉; 𝑝) = 𝑎 ◦  ◦  ◦ 𝜉 ,                                                                                                           (15)

where the layers 𝑎◦ in (15) are restricted to convex and non-decreasing activation functions, since  represents the first convex
layer, see Remark A.10 for a discussion. The model (15) is polyconvex due to the usage of ICNNs und fulfills the objectivity and
material symmetry conditions due to the considered invariants.

Growth condition. The volumetric growth condition (7) can be fulfilled with coercive functions. However, since ICNNs are not
necessarily coercive, they are not suited to fulfill this condition, and therefore, an analytical term should be added to the potential
(15) according to

        𝑊 = 0 (𝜉; 𝑝) + 𝑊vol (det 𝐹 ) ,                                                                                                       (16)

where we choose the polyconvex term (Hartmann and Neff, 2003)
                     (                )2
                                1
      𝑊vol (det 𝐹 ) = det 𝐹 +       −2 .                                                                                                      (17)
                              det 𝐹
Computation of stress. The scalar-valued function 𝑊 given by (16), which consists of the neural network 0 from (15) and the
volumetric growth term 𝑊vol from (17), is then interpreted as a hyperelastic potential, see (1), and the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress
𝑆 = 𝐷𝐹 𝑊 (𝐹 ) is calculated as its gradient, see (2). In the present work, automatic differentiation (Baydin et al., 2018) is used, which
is widely available in modern machine learning libraries. This approach is, of course, not only applicable to the present model but
to any differentiable model built in a ML library providing automatic differentiation.

Reference state. In the reference configuration 𝐹 = 1, the model (16) is not stress-free by construction. However, elastic stress–strain
data received from numerical or experimental investigations will always have the property 𝑆(1) = 0. When the model is calibrated
with this data, it also approximates the stress behavior for 𝐹 = 1, thus fulfilling 𝑆(1) = 0 in an approximate fashion. In Fernández
et al. (2021b) a projection approach is proposed which fulfills the stress-free reference configuration in an exact way. While this
approach preserves polyconvexity when formulated in terms of 𝐹 instead of 𝐶, it is not compatible with the methods of incorporating
objectivity and material symmetry which are used in the present work, and therefore cannot be applied.

3.2. Model based on the deformation gradient

Model formulation. Based on the definition of polyconvexity (8), the most straightforward inputs for a polyconvex FFNN-based
model are the deformation gradient, its cofactor and determinant itself. Thus, when 𝜉 = (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ) ∈ R19 is used as input
for an ICNN 𝑎(𝜉)
               ̄ = 𝑎◦◦𝜉, the output 𝑎(𝜉)
                                       ̄   is convex in 𝜉 and the resulting potential is polyconvex, but does not fulfill the material
symmetry condition, in general.
    Here, the group symmetrization of a function 𝜙(𝐹 ) with respect to a given finite group  ⊂ SO(3) with #() elements, as introduced
in Fernández et al. (2021b) for ML-based models, is of interest
                  1 ∑
       𝜙 (𝐹 ) =          𝜙(𝐹 𝑄) ,                                                                                                 (18)
                 #() 𝑄∈

since the group symmetrized function 𝜙 (𝐹 ) fulfills the material symmetry conditions of the considered group. Application of group
elements 𝑄 ∈  on 𝐹 , i.e, 𝐹 → 𝐹 𝑄, results in the linear transformation of 𝜉 = (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ) according to

        𝜉 ∗𝑠 𝑄 = (𝐹 𝑄, (Cof 𝐹 ) 𝑄, det 𝐹 ),                                                                                                   (19)

                                                                        6
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                      Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


where we introduced the operator ∗𝑠 that specifies the transformation of 𝜉 by 𝑄, and exploited that Cof (𝐹 𝑄) = (Cof 𝐹 ) 𝑄 (Schröder
and Neff, 2003). Such a linear transformation does not affect the convexity of the ICNN 𝑎(𝜉),
                                                                                        ̄     see Corollary A.6 for an explicit proof.
This implies that the following potential model
                                       1 ∑
       0 (𝜉; 𝑝) = 𝑎 ◦  ◦ 𝜉 , 𝑊 =           0 (𝜉 ∗𝑠 𝑄; 𝑝) + 𝑊vol                                                                (20)
                                     # ()   𝑄∈

is polyconvex and fulfills the material symmetry and volume compression conditions. It should be noted that compared to the
previous invariant based model, the first hidden layer of the core  in (20) is not restricted to convex and non-decreasing activation
functions, but only to convex functions. This allows more flexibility in the first hidden layer.

Infinite groups and finite subgroups. The anisotropy of many materials can be described by finite groups, e.g., cubic, orthotropic or
monoclinic materials, such that the group symmetrization (20) can be carried out for the exact fulfillment of the material symmetry
condition (5). For some materials, the symmetry group is infinite, e.g., for transversely isotropic materials. For such cases, as also
remarked in Fernández et al. (2021b), a pragmatic solution for the usage of the group symmetrization (20) can be obtained by
consideration of a finite subgroup of the infinite group. For the case of transverse isotropy, a finite subgroup ∗ti ⊂ ti for chosen 𝑁
can be simply constructed by
               {                                   }         {                  }
        ∗ti ∶= 𝑄𝛼𝑥 | 𝛼 = 2𝜋 𝑛∕𝑁 , 𝑛 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁   ⊂ ti ∶= 𝑄𝛼𝑥 | 𝛼 ∈ [0, 2 𝜋)                                                     (21)
where 𝑄𝛼𝑥 denotes a rotation around the preferred axis 𝑥 by the angle 𝛼. The finite subgroup ∗ti contains 𝑁 equidistant elements of
ti . As will be shown in Section 5, already 𝑁 = 6 elements can be sufficient for an excellent approximation of transverse isotropy.

Computation of stress. As in the invariant-based, differentiable FFNN-based model, the present model uses automatic differentiation
for the computation of the stresses.

Objectivity. While the determinant of the deformation gradient is an invariant quantity with respect to change of observers, the
deformation gradient itself and its cofactor depend on the choice of observer. Thus, the model 𝑊 as defined in (20) is generally not
objective. While the objectivity condition could be fulfilled trivially by using the components of the right Cauchy–Green tensor 𝐶,
this would violate the polyconvexity condition, as only the main diagonal elements of 𝐶 are convex in the deformation gradient.
Consequently, in order to meet both polyconvexity and objectivity, we choose a quantity which is suitable to fulfill the polyconvexity
condition, and take further steps to approximate the objectivity condition. Then, the objectivity of the model is approximated
with a data augmentation approach, following Ling et al. (2016). Based on the existing calibration dataset for a single observer
𝐷 = {𝐹 , 𝑆, 𝑊 }, the dataset is extended by a finite amount of additional observers according to
             ⋃
       𝐷̃=     {𝑄 𝐹 , 𝑄 𝑆, 𝑊 } ,  ⊂ SO(3) .                                                                                      (22)
               𝑄∈

For pragmatic reasons, a finite amount of randomly distributed rotation matrices is chosen. The data augmentation approach can be
visualized as follows: Without data augmentation, the constitutive model is calibrated with a single observer. As ab initio, the model
does not know how to extrapolate the learned material behavior to other observers, it is only applicable to the observer chosen in
the calibration dataset. When the data augmentation approach (22) is applied, the model is calibrated with multiple observers. If
the model is then evaluated with an arbitrary observer, the model will yield reasonable results, as the material behavior for any
observer can be seen as the interpolation between the observers with which the model was calibrated. With a sufficient number
of observers, the model can be trained to behave nearly independent of the observer, as will be demonstrated in the upcoming
examples.
    In fact, for hyperelastic potentials, it is sufficient to apply the objectivity condition (3) to the potential only, which directly implies
the transformation rule for the stress tensor. In Ling et al. (2016) only the potential values were extended and no visualization of
evaluation of the stress values was provided. However, the model quality can benefit from the additional information the stress
tensor provides, and therefore, both quantities are used for the data augmentation in this work. While this approach increases the
size of the training data and thus the required calibration time, it is important to note that the time required for the model evaluation
is not affected, and that no additional simulation or experimental data is required.
    Considering (3) and (4), objectivity could be further enforced by adding terms of the form |𝑊 (𝑄 𝐹 ) − 𝑊 (𝐹 )|2 and
‖𝑆(𝑄 𝐹 ) − 𝑄 𝑆(𝐹 )‖2 to the objective function used for calibration of the model. As, in this approach, both 𝑊 and 𝑆 are received
by the constitutive model, the choice of 𝐹 is not restricted to deformation states used in the calibration dataset. Consequently,
𝐹 may be sampled in a sensible range of deformations in which the model is to be applied, e.g., following the sampling strategy
as proposed by Kunc and Fritzen (2019), together with a finite amount of random rotation matrices 𝑄. This approach takes into
account that objectivity is a physical requirement, which must be fulfilled independent of stress–strain data available for a specific
material. However, in the present work, no additional term is added to the objective function, as the objectivity can already be
approximated very well with the data augmentation approach (22), as will be shown in Section 4.3.

4. Application to cubic metamaterials

4.1. Homogenized behavior of soft beam-lattice metamaterials

   The performance of the models proposed in the previous section is now examined in application to the homogenized behavior of
beam-lattice structures with cubic anisotropy. In Fernández et al. (2021b), the homogenized behaviors of the cubic BCC cell and the

                                                                      7
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




                                              Fig. 1.   Uniaxial deformation in 𝑥-direction for the BCC unit cell.3




cubic X cell are numerically investigated for several calibration and test scenarios, with full data availability on the public GitHub
repository https://github.com/CPShub/sim-data. The mechanical behavior of these metamaterials is highly nonlinear and exhibits
several challenging characteristics like lattice instabilities, which makes it a good benchmark case for the models.
    The cubic BCC structure consists of body-centered beams with additional beams along all edges. Identifying the smallest unit from
which the structure is built, the BCC unit cell is obtained which, regarding the periodicity, contains beams only at three edges, see
Fig. 1b. For large structures built from lattice metamaterials, it is convenient to formulate a constitutive model for the homogenized
behavior of the cells, instead of simulating every single beam of the structure.
    To determine the homogenized behavior of the BCC unit cell, finite element simulations are carried out, where effective
deformation gradients 𝐹 are applied on the cell using displacements on the outer nodes of the beams. With periodic boundary
conditions, the behavior of the unit cell within a larger structure can be simulated. The averaged, or effective, strain energy
density 𝑊 can directly be calculated with the strain energy stored in the beams and the size of the cell. For the structures under
consideration, the effective stress response 𝑆 of the cell can be computed with the reaction forces on the outer nodes and the size
of the cell (Fernández et al., 2021b). In contrast to physical experiments, this numerical characterization yields not only the stress
response of the material, but also the strain energy density, and the resulting dataset
             {(           )    }
       𝐷 = 𝐹1 , 𝑆 1 , 𝑊 1 , …                                                                                                      (23)

consists of triplets for corresponding deformation gradient, effective stress and effective strain energy density for each simulation
step and applied deformation.
    For the calibration data used here, uniaxial, equibiaxial, planar, shear, and volumetric deformations were applied on the unit
cell. These deformations can also be applied in physical experiments. The calibration dataset 𝐷𝐶 consists of 905 triplets. Beside the
calibration data, three test cases were examined. For the first two test cases, biaxial deformations with different stretch ratios are
applied on the unit cell, while the third test case is a combination of tension and shear deformation. All three test cases exhibit
lattice instabilities and complex deformations, which are not included in the calibration data. The test dataset 𝐷𝑇 consists of 605
datapoints. Further technical details on the simulations can be found in Fernández et al. (2021b). In the present work, the first test
case of Fernández et al. (2021b) is referred to as ‘‘biaxial test’’, while the third test case is referred to as ‘‘mixed test’’. Especially
the ‘‘mixed test’’ is a good benchmark case, as the combination of tension and shear is a very general deformation.
    Due to the soft materials and high slenderness of the beams, lattice instabilities occur for several deformation modes. In Fernández
et al. (2021b), the microstructure simulation were carried out with an experimentally validated nonlinear post-buckling analysis
approach (Jamshidian et al., 2020). Taking a closer look at the uniaxial deformation of the BCC cell, it exhibits instabilities in both
compression and tension, which are shown in Fig. 1. Even for small uniaxial compression, the load bearing beams show instabilities,
while for tension the less stressed beams on the edges show instabilities, which results in a highly differing behavior of the cell for
compression and tension, leading to distinctive changes in the slope of the stress components, see Fig. 2. This highly challenging
behavior is observed for all deformation modes, in both the calibration and test cases.
    The properties of the constitutive models are examined with the BCC cell, the behavior for the cubic X cell is only shortly
discussed. The X cell consists of body-centered beams, without additional beams at the edges like the BCC cell. Therefore, less
lattice instabilities occur compared to the BCC cell. While uniaxial and equibiaxial deformation gradients are quite similar, their
stress response for the X cell differ by a factor of ten, which is a challenging behavior for constitutive models. Apart from this case,
the stress response of all load scenarios has the same order of magnitude. Furthermore, the amount of data points is roughly equal
for all load scenarios. Therefore, for the following investigations, no data normalization is applied. If necessary, strategies such as
the 𝐿2 normalization of deformation cases proposed in Fernández et al. (2021a) could be applied.


  3   Figure from Fernández et al. (2021b).


                                                                                8
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                     Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




Fig. 2. Deformation (left side) and first Piola–Kirchhoff stress 𝑆 (right side) for uniaxial deformation of the cubic BCC cell. Lattice instabilities express themselves
by nearly horizontal stress values of 𝑆11 (compression) and decreasing slope of 𝑆11 (tension). Stress in [hPa].




4.2. Preparation of the models

                    SNE ). The model proposed by Schröder et al. (2010) is used as an example for conventional polyconvex models
Analytical model (𝑊cub
formulated in terms of invariants. For the potential of the model (14), 𝑛 = 2 summands are used.

FFNN model by Fernández et al. (2021b) (𝑊 C ). The potential model proposed by Fernández et al. (2021b) is used as an example for
FFNN based models which are not polyconvex by construction. The model is similar to the one discussed in Section 3.2, with the
difference that the six independent components of the right Cauchy–Green tensor are used as input, therefore the model is objective
by construction. Following Fernández et al. (2021b), the models core is built from three layers with 16 nodes using Softplus functions
in each layer, and unrestricted parameters.

Polyconvex ICNN model based on invariants (𝑊    I
                                              √ ). The set of cubic invariants introduced in Schröder et al. (2010), see Eq. (13), is
used, with the additional invariant 𝐼3∗ = −2 𝐼3 . This additional polyconvex invariant can be received from the last summand in
Eq. (14), and is important for the model to represent negative stress values. Using four isotropic invariants and two cubic invariants,
                                                                     (                       )
the input of the neural network is the vector of invariants  = 𝐼1 , 𝐼2 , 𝐼3 , 𝐼3∗ , 𝐽7 , 𝐽11 ∈ R6 . An ICNN core based on Softplus
() functions, see (A.12), is used, with the number of layers in {2, 3} and the number of nodes in {8, 16, 32}. The weights in all
layers are non-negative. The restrictions on the networks parameters, which are caused by the convexity condition, are discussed in
Proposition A.9. For a compact notation, the core is referred to as e.g.  [8, 8] for a core containing two layers with eight nodes
with  functions in each layer.

Polyconvex ICNN model based on the deformation gradient (𝑊 F ). For the second model, the input (𝐹 , det 𝐹 ) ∈ R10 is chosen. Several
simulations showed that, for the metamaterials under consideration, the deformation gradient alone is not enough to represent the
material behavior, while there is no improvement when using all arguments of (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ). The group symmetrization is carried
out with the cubic group 7 ⊂ SO(3), which contains 24 orthogonal transformations (Ebbing, 2010). The network architectures are
chosen as described above for the invariant based model 𝑊 I , but with arbitrary weights in the first layer, and non-negative weights
in all subsequent layers, c.f. Proposition A.9.

Performance measures. While, from experimental investigations of materials, only stress values are available, the numerical
evaluation of the unit cells yields both effective energy density and the stress tensor. For a given dataset 𝐷, the mean squared
error (MSE) of the constitutive model 𝑊 □ , □ ∈ {SNE, C, I, F}, is defined as
                             [                                                                ]
                     1 ∑          1    (                    )2   1 ‖                       ‖2
       MSE□ (𝑝) =                       𝑊 (𝐹 ) − 𝑊 □ (𝐹 ; 𝑝) +       ‖ 𝑆 (𝐹 ) − 𝑆 □ (𝐹 ; 𝑝)‖                                (24)
                   # (𝐷) 𝐹 ∈𝐷 (J∕m3 )2                         9Pa2 ‖                      ‖

where # (𝐷) denotes the number of datapoints in 𝐷. The parameters 𝑝 of the models are found as the minimizers of the corresponding
MSE. However, since the minimization of the MSE is a non-convex optimization problem, a local minimum 𝑝 may strongly depend
on the initial guess and the optimization algorithm. Thus, we introduce the mean deviation of two model instances (MD)   ̃ with
parameters 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑝𝑗 on a set of deformation gradients 𝐷𝐹 as
                                    [                                                                                ]
             (      )          ∑               ( □(        )       (       ))2    1 ‖ □(         )       (       )‖2
      ̃□ 𝑝 , 𝑝 = ( 1 )
      MD
                                         1
                                                𝑊   𝐹 ; 𝑝    − 𝑊 □
                                                                    𝐹 ; 𝑝      +      ‖ 𝑆 𝐹 ; 𝑝    − 𝑆 □
                                                                                                          𝐹 ; 𝑝   ‖    .      (25)
                                                                                 9Pa2 ‖
               𝑖  𝑗                                      𝑖               𝑗                     𝑖                𝑗 ‖
                       # 𝐷𝐹 𝐹 ∈𝐷𝐹     (J∕m3 )2
                                                                                              ̃ of all possible combinations of
Then, the overall mean deviation of a model (MD) with 𝑛 instances is obtained as the averaged MD
model instances:
                         ( )−1 𝑛−1 𝑛
            (         )    𝑛     ∑ ∑          (      )
      MD□ 𝑝1 , … , 𝑝𝑛 =                    ̃□ 𝑝 , 𝑝 .
                                           MD                                                                              (26)
                                                𝑖  𝑗
                           2     𝑖=1 𝑗=𝑖+1

                                                                                   9
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                    Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




                        SNE
Fig. 3. Evaluation of 𝑊cub  for the BCC cell, calibrated only for the uniaxial deformation case. Points depict the simulation data, while lines depict the calibrated
                 [   ]
model; stress in hPa . The 𝑆11 component is not well-fitted.




For the dataset used to calibrate the parameters, different sets of experiments may be applied on a material. As long as each dataset
contains all the required information, different calibration datasets should yield the same model behavior. However, for models
whose parameters have no physical interpretation (which is the case for ML based models), different calibration datasets may lead
to a different model behavior. Thus, we introduce the mean deviation (MD) between a single model instance calibrated on the
dataset 𝐷1 with parameters 𝑝0 and multiple model instances trained on another dataset 𝐷2 with parameters 𝑝1 , … , 𝑝𝑛 :
             □(                       ) 1∑  𝑛
                                                  (      )
        MD          𝑝0 , 𝑝 1 , … , 𝑝 𝑛 =       ̃□ 𝑝 , 𝑝 .
                                               MD                                                                                                              (27)
                                                    0  𝑖
                                         𝑛 𝑖=1

Implementation. The model 𝑊 SNE has been implemented in MATLAB R2021a, the machine learning models were implemented in
TensorFlow 2.3.0 with Python 3.7. Each machine learning model has been trained with the full batch of training data and the ADAM
optimizer using default settings, every architecture was initialized three times. The models 𝑊 C and 𝑊 I were trained for 20,000
epochs using the calibration dataset 𝐷𝐶 . The model based on the deformation gradient 𝑊 F was trained for 15,000 epochs with the
calibration dataset 𝐷𝐶 , and retrained for 2000 epochs with the extended calibration dataset 𝐷    ̃𝐶 according to Eq. (22). From our
experience, this strategy provides a good balance between accuracy, speed of convergence and computation time required. Since
the material objectivity of the model 𝑊 F is only approximated, both MSE and MD of the model are evaluated with 1,024 random
observers. For the additional observers, uniformly distributed rotation matrices are generated using the ‘‘Spatial Transformation’’
package provided by SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020). For the BCC cell, the models are also trained one time with the adapted calibration
dataset 𝐷𝐶∗ which contains the shear and volumetric deformation cases (from 𝐷𝐶 ), as well as the biaxial and mixed test cases (from
𝐷𝑇 ), following the training strategies given above.

Reproducibility of the models. The potentials can be reproduced with the information of the network’s architecture and parameters,
i.e., the number of layers and neurons, the connection of the neurons, choice of input and output, activation functions, as well
as the weights and biases for each neuron. However, the training of the model, i.e., the process of parameter calibration of the
weights and biases, is of utmost importance for its performance. As mentioned above, this calibration corresponds to solving a non-
convex optimization problem, for which minima are usually local and may strongly depend on the initial guess and the optimization
algorithm. Thus, for the same network architecture, typically several parameter sets are determined based on different random
initializations, which renders the calibration process non-reproducible. To meet this difficulty, we provide not only the calibration
data, but also a compiled version of our TensorFlow model instances as well as their sets of parameters in the public GitHub
repository https://github.com/CPShub/sim-data. With the information about the networks architecture and the parameters used
for the potential, it can be reproduced in any program, c.f. (A.1).

4.3. Model evaluation for BCC cell

    The performance of the four models calibrated with the training data for the BCC cell is now discussed. First of all, the evaluation
of the analytical model 𝑊 SNE only in the uniaxial deformation case is shown in Fig. 3. As can be seen, even for this simple case the
model fails to represent the material behavior. Thus, this model is not considered for further, more detailed performance evaluations.
    Before the machine learning models can be compared, the required amount of observers for the data augmentation of the model
𝑊 F must be examined. The model 𝑊 F is calibrated with the full calibration dataset 𝐷    ̃𝐶 , using 8, 16, 32 and 64 random observers,
see Eq. (22), and evaluated after calibration with 1,024 random observers. The corresponding MSEs and relative calibration times
are shown in Table 1, and the shear response for each calibration is illustrated in Fig. 4. While, for a calibration with 64 observers,
the dataset is eight times as big as the dataset for eight observers, its calibration time is just under six times as long. Although
data augmentation increases the calibration time, for increasing datasets, this approach profits from the fast evaluation of ANNs
for large batch sizes. If the model response depends on the choice of observer, the evaluation yields an area containing the stress
response for all different observers, whereas for sufficiently well approximated objectivity, minimum and maximum model response

                                                                                 10
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                               Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




Fig. 4. Variation of observers for 𝑊 F for the cubic BCC cell. Points depict the simulation data, while lines and shaded areas depict the calibrated model
evaluated with 1,024 observers. Stress tensor 𝑄𝑇 𝑆(𝑄 𝐹 ) (4) for shear deformation is shown, with normal components in red colors, shear components in blue
                                                        [    ]
colors and less important components in gray; stress in hPa .




Table 1
MSEs of calibrated 𝑊 F models for the BCC cell with augmented data for learning objectivity. Evaluation with 1,024 random observers. Calibration times related
to calibration time for 8 observers.
 Observers for the calibration dataset                         MSE                                                                  Relative calibration time
                                                               𝐷𝑇                                𝐷𝐶
 8                                                             1.25 ⋅ 104                        8.64 ⋅ 103                         1
 16                                                            3.97 ⋅ 103                        1.65 ⋅ 103                         1.98
 32                                                            3.42 ⋅ 103                        6.84 ⋅ 102                         2.95
 64                                                            7.61 ⋅ 102                        2.57 ⋅ 102                         5.70




coincide, and the area practically reduces to a single line. For a calibration with eight observers, the individual stress components
for the shear deformation are within a wide range, and the MSEs are very high. Therefore, the material objectivity is not fulfilled.
Using more observers for the data augmentation, the approximation quality of the objectivity increases. For 64 observers in the
calibration dataset, the shear responses for different observers are indistinguishable from each other, and the MSEs are sufficiently
small. This shows that objectivity can be successfully learned using the data augmentation approach. In the following, the model
𝑊 F is calibrated using 64 observers, and all evaluations for the model are carried out with 1,024 random observers.
    In Table 2, the three best MSEs for the three machine learning models trained on 𝐷𝐶 and 𝐷         ̃𝐶 are depicted and sorted for
decreasing error on the test dataset 𝐷𝑇 . The model 𝑊 F yields far better results than 𝑊 I for both calibration and test datasets,
which may be caused by a smaller function space of the model 𝑊 I due to the human choice of invariants. While the MSEs of
𝑊 F are slightly higher than the ones of 𝑊 C on 𝐷𝐶 , which is reasonable since the polyconvex model is more restricted in fitting
the calibration data than the non-polyconvex one, it actually performs slightly better on the test data. This could be rooted in the
additional mathematical structure that polyconvexity incorporates into the model, making it more generalizable.
    As already encountered in Fernández et al. (2021b), different neural network architectures using a vastly differing amount of
parameters may lead to models of equal quality, with different results for multiple initializations using the same architecture. Also,
the stress error in Eq. (24) dominates the overall MSE for all evaluations. For the convex neural networks used in this work, the
models need a sufficiently high amount of nodes and layers to counteract the loss of flexibility due to the restrictions on the
parameters. For the model 𝑊 F ,  [16, 16, 16] is the smallest architecture yielding good results, while there were no significant
benefits for architectures using more layers or nodes.

                                                                             11
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                             Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703

Table 2
Deviations of model instances and MSEs of calibrated ML models for the BCC cell. MD evaluates the deviation for the instances trained on 𝐷𝐶 , while MD
compares the deviation of the instance trained on 𝐷𝐶∗ to the instances trained on 𝐷𝐶 .
 Model                                        Param.            Calibr.          Deviations                                  MSE
                                                                data             𝐷𝑇𝐹                    𝐷𝐶𝐹                  𝐷𝑇                    𝐷𝐶
 𝑊 C with             [16, 16, 16]        673                 𝐷𝐶                                                           1.02 ⋅ 103            1.59 ⋅ 102
                                         ——"——                                                                               1.40 ⋅ 103            1.58 ⋅ 102
                                         ——"——                                                                               1.41 ⋅ 103            1.63 ⋅ 102
                      [16, 16, 16]        673                 𝐷𝐶∗                                                          2.40 ⋅ 102            4.18 ⋅ 103
                                                                MD               2.05 ⋅ 103             5.91 ⋅ 100
                                                                MD               1.47 ⋅ 103             4.21 ⋅ 103
 𝑊 I with             [32, 32, 32]          2,369             𝐷𝐶                                                           1.33 ⋅ 104            1.11 ⋅ 104
                      [32, 32]              1,313             —"—                                                          1.41 ⋅ 104            1.10 ⋅ 104
                      [16, 16]              401               —"—                                                          1.44 ⋅ 104            1.12 ⋅ 104
                      [16, 16]              401               𝐷𝐶∗                                                          1.77 ⋅ 105            1.30 ⋅ 105
                                                                MD               2.37 ⋅ 102             2.93 ⋅ 102
                                                                MD               3.47 ⋅ 103             1.84 ⋅ 103
 𝑊 F with             [16, 16, 16]        737                 ̃𝐶
                                                                𝐷                                                            7.47 ⋅ 102            2.45 ⋅ 102
                                         ——"——                                                                               7.74 ⋅ 102            3.43 ⋅ 102
                                         ——"——                                                                               8.05 ⋅ 102            2.62 ⋅ 102
                      [16, 16, 16]        737                 ̃∗
                                                                𝐷                                                            6.81 ⋅ 102            5.42 ⋅ 102
                                                                 𝐶

                                                                MD               1.60 ⋅ 102             1.11 ⋅ 102
                                                                MD               4.36 ⋅ 102             2.66 ⋅ 102




     Furthermore, in Table 2 the mean deviations for the three machine learning models are shown, evaluating the deviations of the
different instances of each individual model. The deviations are evaluated for the datasets 𝐷𝐶𝐹 and 𝐷𝑇𝐹 , which contain all deformation
gradients applied in the calibration dataset 𝐷𝐶 and test dataset 𝐷𝑇 , respectively. MD evaluates the deviation for the instances trained
on 𝐷𝐶 , while MD compares the deviation of the single instance trained on the dataset 𝐷𝐶∗ to the instances trained on 𝐷𝐶 . For the
model 𝑊 C the MD on 𝐷𝐶𝐹 is very low, which may be attributed to the high flexibility of the unrestricted network core, allowing
the model to be very similar on 𝐷𝐶 for every initialization. However, for 𝐷𝑇𝐹 , the MD of the model 𝑊 C is worse than its MSE
on 𝐷𝑇 . Furthermore, for both 𝐷𝑇𝐹 and 𝐷𝐶𝐹 , the model behavior depends on the dataset used for the calibration, which leads to a
high MD. Actually, MD on 𝐷𝐶𝐹 is even three magnitudes higher than MD. For the model 𝑊 I , the MD on both datasets is about two
magnitudes smaller than its MSEs on the datasets. This may be caused by the additional mathematical structure that polyconvexity
and invariants incorporate into the model. While the deviation of multiple instances trained on the same dataset is very low, the
training on the adapted dataset 𝐷𝐶∗ leads to a different model behavior, which results in a high MD. The reason for this is that the
model is not flexible enough to capture the material behavior. The model 𝑊 F has a flexible input and, due to the polyconvexity
condition, a pronounced mathematical structure. This leads to excellent results for both the MSE and the MD values, making it the
only model of this comparison which has both excellent approximation qualities and a consistent behavior within multiple model
instances. Furthermore, even for a calibration with the adapted dataset 𝐷   ̃ ∗ the model behavior stays consistent. The deviation MD
                                                                              𝐶
has the same magnitude as MD, and also the MSEs for the instances trained with different datasets have the same magnitude. For
the following evaluations, the core  [16, 16] is used for 𝑊 I , while for 𝑊 C and 𝑊 F the core with the smallest MSE is chosen.
     In Fig. 5, the uniaxial deformation case and mixed test case for 𝑊 C are shown to examine the ellipticity of the model. As already
encountered in Fernández et al. (2021b), the model shows excellent approximation properties. However, in both examined cases
in Fig. 5, the model loses its ellipticity even for small deformations, which causes material instability and would lead to major
drawbacks in numerical applications such as the finite element method. Consequently, for the metamaterials under consideration,
it is important to include the polyconvexity condition into the model formulation, as it implies ellipticity, and thus ensures material
stability. Typically, for soft materials, one does not expect loss of material stability for a deformation gradient 𝐹 in a bounded set
including the identity deformation 𝐹 = 1 (even if large elastic strains may occur). This is, e.g., the case for isotropic elastic energies
defined in the logarithmic strain tensor (Neff et al., 2016, 2015; Schröder et al., 2018). The loss of ellipticity in these models occurs
only for extremely large strains that cannot be observed in experiments.
     In Fig. 6, the behavior of 𝑊 C and 𝑊 F is examined for volumetric tension and compression. Regarding the volumetric growth
condition (7), the strain energy density should rapidly grow for 𝐽 = det 𝐹 → 0+ . The model 𝑊 F contains the term 𝑊vol from (17)
and thus fulfills the growth condition. In the formulation of 𝑊 C , the growth condition is not considered, and consequently it is
violated for the extrapolation 𝐽 → 0+ . For the metamaterials under consideration, lattice instabilities may lead to high volumetric
compression, therefore the growth condition should be included in the model formulation. It must be emphasized that both the loss
of ellipticity and the nonphysical behavior for 𝐽 → 0+ are no specific drawbacks of the model 𝑊 C as proposed by Fernández et al.
(2021b). It is very likely that other ML-based constitutive models would show the same behavior when calibrated to the examined
data, as long as ellipticity and the volumetric growth condition are not explicitly considered in the model formulation.
     In Fig. 7, a subset of the calibration and test cases for the model 𝑊 I is shown to examine some model characteristics. The
model yields acceptable results for deformation gradients with dominating main diagonal elements. For the uniaxial and equibiaxial
calibration case, the component 𝑆33 shows a large deviation from the simulation data, which also transfers to the biaxial test case.

                                                                          12
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




Fig. 5. Evaluation of 𝑊 C for the BCC cell, shaded areas denote the model’s loss of ellipticity. The ellipticity was checked with the Hessian of the potential,
using 500 random unit vectors for each test vector, c.f. (10). Points depict the simulation data, while lines depict the calibrated model. Normal components of
                                                                                                         [    ]
the stress tensor in red colors, shear components in blue, less important components in gray; stress in hPa .




                    Fig. 6. Evaluation of 𝑊 C and 𝑊 F for volumetric deformation of the cubic BCC cell; strain energy density in [kJ/m3 ].


Table 3
Deviation of model instances and MSEs of calibrated 𝑊 F model for the X cell.
 Model                                          Param.             Calibr.            Deviations                                  MSE
                                                                   data               𝐷𝑇𝐹                    𝐷𝐶𝐹                  𝐷𝑇                    𝐷𝐶
 𝑊 F with              [16, 16, 16]         737                  ̃𝐶
                                                                   𝐷                                                              5.41 ⋅ 102            2.38 ⋅ 102
                                           ——"——                                                                                  5.62 ⋅ 102            2.61 ⋅ 102
                                           ——"——                                                                                  8.82 ⋅ 102            2.54 ⋅ 102
                                                                   MD                 1.47 ⋅ 102             5.64 ⋅ 101




For shear deformation, the model completely fails to represent the simulation data, consequently, it also fails to represent the mixed
test case. While, basically, the set of invariants for the model could be extended, it is unlikely that the model behavior for the cubic
metamaterials under considerations can be improved with this approach. While the model shows drawbacks especially for shear
deformations, the additional invariants can only use main diagonal elements of 𝐶 in order to be polyconvex, which makes it hard to
gain flexibility for shear deformations. However, for a wide range of materials with less challenging behavior, the invariant-based
model may still be a good choice, which is demonstrated in Section 5 for transverse isotropy.
    In Fig. 8, a subset of the calibration and test cases for the model 𝑊 F is shown to examine the model’s characteristics. The model
shows excellent results for every deformation mode of the calibration dataset and the test dataset, with only small deviations of the
𝑆12 component for the mixed test case. After recalibration of the model with the concatenation of calibration and test dataset for
1000 epochs, the model can perfectly represent the simulation data for both calibration and test data, which is not shown in Fig. 8.
The data augmentation approximates the material objectivity so well, that no dependence on the observer can be seen at all.

4.4. Model evaluation for X cell

   In the following, for the evaluation of the performance of the models calibrated with the training data for the X cell, only the
results for the model 𝑊 F are shortly discussed; the results for the model 𝑊 I confirmed the observations made for the BCC cell
without yielding further insights. The model 𝑊 F was initialized three times using three layers with 16 nodes in each layer, leading

                                                                              13
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                               Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




Fig. 7. Evaluation of 𝑊 I for the cubic BCC cell. Points depict the simulation data, while lines depict the calibrated model. Normal components of the stress
                                                                                             [   ]
tensor in red colors, shear components in blue, less important components in gray; stress in hPa .




Fig. 8. Evaluation of 𝑊 F for the cubic BCC cell. Points depict the simulation data, lines depict the calibrated model. Normal components of the stress tensor
                                                                                      [    ]
in red colors, shear components in blue, less important components in gray; stress in hPa .




                                                                             14
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




  Fig. 9. Evaluation of 𝑊 F for the cubic X cell. Points depict the simulation data, while lines and shaded areas depict the calibrated model; stress in [hPa].




to the MDs and MSEs shown in Table 3. In Fig. 9, the uniaxial and equibiaxial deformation mode for the model with the best 𝐷𝑇 are
shown. While the model shows excellent agreement with the simulation data for almost all calibration cases, in the uniaxial tension
regime, the model shows a slight dependence on the choice of observer. The reason for this is that the uniaxial and equibiaxial
deformations are similar, while their stress response differs by a factor of ten. Therefore it is challenging for the model to capture
the material’s behavior for both uniaxial and equibiaxial deformations. This may be resolved by an adapted training strategy as
proposed in Fernández et al. (2021a), for which the stress responses of the different deformation cases are scaled to a comparable
magnitude for the training. We should also remark that approximate satisfaction of objectivity does not conflict with an existence
theorem based on polyconvexity and growth or coercivity conditions.

5. Application to transverse isotropy

   After the detailed examinations for cubic lattice metamaterials in Section 4, the application of the polyconvex ML models to
transverse isotropy is now briefly discussed. In doing so, we demonstrate the straightforward applicability of our models to other
symmetry groups. Also, for the highly challenging behavior of cubic lattice metamaterials, the invariant-based model 𝑊 I showed
poor approximation quality. With the following example we show that, for a wide range of materials, 𝑊 I can still be an appropriate
choice.

5.1. Data generation

Analytical transversely isotropic potential. For the following investigations, we generate data with the polyconvex model proposed by
Schröder et al. (2008), which is applicable to several symmetry groups, including transverse isotropy. In the following, the preferred
axis of the transversely isotropic symmetry group (21) is chosen as the 𝑥1 -axis, which motivates the second order structural tensor
                  (           )
                        1 1
       𝐺ti = diag 𝛽 2 , ,        .                                                                                                (28)
                        𝛽 𝛽
Using this structural tensor, the two transversely isotropic invariants
              (     )                     (            )
      𝐽4 = tr 𝐶 𝐺ti ,              𝐽5 = tr Cof (𝐶) 𝐺ti                                                                                                      (29)

can be derived, which are convex in 𝐹 and Cof 𝐹 , respectively (Schröder et al., 2008). Together with the isotropic invariants 𝐼1−3 ,
Schröder et al. (2008) proposed the potential
                                              (√ )               ( 𝛼
                                                         𝜂1              𝛼 )
      𝑊tiSNE = 𝛼1 𝐼1 + 𝛼2 𝐼2 + 𝛿1 𝐼3 − 𝛿2 log   𝐼3 +   (      )𝛼 𝐽4 4 + 𝐽5 4 ,                                                 (30)
                                                     𝛼4 tr 𝐺ti 4
which is objective by construction, and polyconvex if all parameters are equal to or greater than zero. The parameter 𝛿2 depends
on the other parameters and is chosen such that the model is stress-free in the reference configuration. Note that the parameter
                                                                                                              (                      )
𝛽 of the structural tensor (28) needs to be specified as well. Here, we use the parameter values 𝛽, 𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , 𝛿1 , 𝛿2 , 𝛼4 , 𝜂1 =
(2, 8, 0, 10, 56, 2, 10), which were fitted in Schröder et al. (2008) to referential data of a not further specified real-world material.
    Using the potential (30), transversely isotropic data can be generated. As was already the case for the numerical homogenization
of cubic lattice metamaterials, the analytical potential (30) provides both energy and stress values. However, for the following
investigations, we will only make use of the stress values, which will demonstrate that energy values, which are typically not
available in experiments, are not necessarily required to calibrate the proposed polyconvex ML models. Given as an analytical
function, the potential (30) can directly be evaluated for a given deformation gradient 𝐹 ∈ GL+ (3). This leaves the question open
of how to choose 𝐹 for the generation of calibration and test datasets.

                                                                               15
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                    Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


Calibration dataset. The calibration dataset 𝐷𝐶 consists of uniaxial and equibiaxial tensile tests, as well as a shear deformation. For
the special cases of uniaxial and equibiaxial tensile tests, the corresponding boundary-value problem can be directly formulated as
systems of non-linear equations. For uniaxial tension in 𝑥1 -direction, deformation gradient and stress tensor are given by
                (              )              (             )
       𝐹 = diag 𝐹11 , 𝐹22 , 𝐹33 ,    𝑆 = diag 𝑆11 (𝐹 ), 0, 0 ,                                                                     (31)

where 𝐹11 is prescribed, 𝐹22 = 𝐹33 are unknown and 𝑆11 (𝐹 ) = 𝐷𝐹11 𝑊tiSNE (𝐹 ). For equibiaxial tension in 𝑥1 , 𝑥2 -directions,
                (               )              (                     )
        𝐹 = diag 𝐹11 , 𝐹22 , 𝐹33 ,     𝑆 = diag 𝑆11 (𝐹 ), 𝑆22 (𝐹 ), 0                                                                          (32)

holds, where 𝐹11 = 𝐹22 , 𝐹33 is unknown and 𝑆11 (𝐹 ) = 𝐷𝐹11 𝑊tiSNE (𝐹 ), 𝑆22 (𝐹 ) = 𝐷𝐹22 𝑊tiSNE (𝐹 ). These non-linear systems of
equations are then solved with standard functions provided by MATLAB R2021a, which provides the overall deformation gradients
for uniaxial and equibiaxial tensile tests. For this, 200 equidistant values 𝐹11 ∈ [0.5, 2] are prescribed. The shear deformation
𝐹 = 1 + 𝛾(𝑒1 ⊗ 𝑒2 + 𝑒2 ⊗ 𝑒1 ) is evaluated for 250 equidistant values 𝛾 ∈ [0, 0.5]. Selected data points are visualized in Figs. 10
and 11.

Test dataset. The test dataset 𝐷𝑇 consists of a biaxial test and a combined tension-shear test. Note that the ‘‘biaxial test’’ and ‘‘mixed
test’’ are different from the ones used in Section 4. For the biaxial test, the system of nonlinear equations
                  (             )             (                     )
        𝐹 = diag 𝐹11 , 𝐹22 , 𝐹33 ,    𝑆 = diag 𝑆11 (𝐹 ), 𝑆22 (𝐹 ), 0                                                                  (33)

with prescribed 𝐹11 , 𝐹22 = 0.5 𝐹11 is solved for 𝐹33 for 100 equidistant values 𝐹11 ∈ [0.5, 2]. The mixed test case

           ⎛1 + 0.2 𝜆      0.2 𝜆         0    ⎞
        𝐹 =⎜    0        1 + 0.1 𝜆       0    ⎟                                                                                                (34)
           ⎜                                  ⎟
           ⎝    0            0       1 − 0.1 𝜆⎠
is evaluated for 100 equidistant values 𝜆 ∈ [−1, 2.5].
    After generation of the deformation gradients 𝐹 for all calibration and test cases, the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress 𝑆 = 𝐷𝐹 𝑊tiSNE (𝐹 )
is evaluated, and the resulting datasets consist of tuples
            {(      )     }
       𝐷 = 𝐹1 , 𝑆 1 , … .                                                                                                            (35)

Altogether, the calibration dataset 𝐷𝐶 consists of 650 tuples, while the test dataset 𝐷𝑇 consists of 200 tuples.

5.2. Model preparation

    For the invariant-based ML model 𝑊 I , the two transversely
                                                           √         isotropic invariants from (29) together with the three isotropic
                                                                                     (                       )
invariants from (13) and the additional invariant 𝐼3∗ = −2 𝐼3 form the input  = 𝐼1 , 𝐼2 , 𝐼3 , 𝐼3∗ , 𝐽4 , 𝐽5 ∈ R6 of the neural network.
For the deformation gradient based model 𝑊 F , the input (𝐹 , det 𝐹 ) ∈ R10 is chosen. For the network core of 𝑊 I , one hidden layer
with eight nodes turned out as a sufficiently accurate choice, while for 𝑊 F three hidden layers with 32 nodes in each layer are
chosen. As before, convexity is ensured by choice of the convex Softplus activation function in each node and restrictions on the
network parameters, which are discussed in Section 4.2 and Proposition A.9, respectively. The transversely isotropic symmetry group
ti has an infinite number of elements, see (21). In order to apply the group symmetrization approach from (20) on 𝑊 F , the group
is approximated by six rotations around the 𝑥1 -direction, c.f. Eq. (21).
    For the model calibration, the MSE
                      1 ∑ 1 ‖                           ‖2
       MSE□ (𝑝) =                  ‖𝑆 (𝐹 ) − 𝑆 □ (𝐹 ; 𝑝)‖                                                                            (36)
                    # (𝐷)        2 ‖                    ‖
                             9Pa
                          𝐹 ∈𝐷

with 𝑊 □ , □ ∈ {I, F} is applied, c.f. Section 4.2. Here, the MSE for the shear deformation is weighted twice, as its stress response is
considerably lower than the stress response of the other calibration cases. For the data augmentation for objectivity of 𝑊 F , see (22),
128 random rotation matrices are used, while for the group symmetrization for transverse isotropy of 𝑊 F , see (20), six equidistant
rotations around the 𝑥1 -axis are applied. Since both objectivity and material symmetry are only approximated for 𝑊 F , the model
is evaluated with 1024 random observers for the verification of objectivity (3) and with 60 equidistant rotations around the 𝑥1 -axis
for the material symmetry (5). Both models are initialized three times and each trained for 5000 epochs.
    Further technical details are discussed in Section 4.2. The MATLAB code used to generate calibration and test data, as well as
compiled versions of both ML models and their sets of parameters are provided in the public GitHub repository https://github.com/
CPShub/sim-data.

5.3. Model evaluation

    In Table 4, the MSEs of the different model initializations are shown. The ML models show excellent agreement with both the
calibration and test dataset. In particular, even though 𝑊 I has only one layer with eight nodes, it can represent the data almost
perfectly, which is most likely caused by the fact that the ML model 𝑊 I uses the same invariants as the analytical potential (30). A
subset of the training dataset and both test cases are shown for 𝑊 I and 𝑊 F in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively. Again, the model 𝑊 I
shows excellent agreement for the transversely isotropic data. For the shear calibration case and the test cases, 𝑊 F shows a slight

                                                                         16
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703

Table 4
MSEs of calibrated ML models for the transversely isotropic data.
 Model                                                                         Param.                             MSE
                                                                                                                  𝐷𝑇                                   𝐷𝐶
 𝑊 I with                              [8]                                   65                                 1.52 ⋅ 10−1                          2.90 ⋅ 10−2
                                                         ——"——                                                    7.84 ⋅ 10−1                          6.41 ⋅ 10−2
                                                         ——"——                                                    8.47 ⋅ 10−1                          3.44 ⋅ 10−2
 𝑊 F with                              [32, 32, 32]                          737                                3.20 ⋅ 100                           2.80 ⋅ 10−1
                                                         ——"——                                                    3.40 ⋅ 100                           3.44 ⋅ 10−1
                                                         ——"——                                                    4.12 ⋅ 100                           2.95 ⋅ 10−1




Fig. 10. Evaluation of 𝑊 I for transverse isotropy. Points depict data from the analytical model 𝑊tiSNE , while lines depict the evaluation of the calibrated model
                                                                                                                                                  [    ]
𝑊 I . Normal components of the stress tensor are shown in red colors, shear components in blue, less important components in gray; stress in hPa .




dependence on the observer. Overall, both ML models are able to represent the analytical potential (30) very well, and here especially
the invariant-based model 𝑊 I shows excellent results. As such analytical potentials are successfully applied in, e.g., modeling of soft
biological tissues (Balzani et al., 2006), this implies that the polyconvex ML models are also applicable to a wide range of real-world
materials.


6. A critique of machine learning in nonlinear elasticity theory


    At this point, we would like to briefly discuss some general issues raised by the use of machine learning techniques in nonlinear
elasticity theory. First and foremost, we would like to point out that these methods are not meant to serve as a replacement for
classical analytical models, but rather as an addition to the already existing extensive theoretical framework. More specifically, we
want to address three interrelated shortcomings of the data-driven approach:

     • the lack of an intuitive interpretation of the model and its parameters;
     • the unstable (and, in practice, even non-deterministic) dependence of the parameter values on the experimental data;
     • the uncertainty of whether the resulting model is applicable to problems outside the range of prior experiments.

To a smaller extent, all three of these issues can be observed for a number of analytical models as well, especially some
phenomenological models with a large number of parameters, which could be considered a precursor to the modern purely
data-driven approaches.

                                                                                17
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703




Fig. 11. Evaluation of 𝑊 F for transverse isotropy. Points depict data from the analytical model 𝑊tiSNE , while lines depict the evaluation of the calibrated model
                                                                                                                                       [    ]
𝑊 F . Normal components of the stress tensor in red colors, shear components in blue, less important components in gray; stress in hPa .




6.1. Analytical models

    For comparison, we first consider the classical, isotropic Hencky strain energy
                                                     √          𝜅        √
       𝑊 H ∶ GL+ (3) → R ,     𝑊 H (𝐹 ) = 𝜇 ‖ dev log 𝐹 𝑇 𝐹 ‖2 + [tr(log 𝐹 𝑇 𝐹 )]2 ,                                              (37)
                                                                2
which depends solely on the two physical parameters 𝜇 (the shear modulus) and 𝜅 (the bulk modulus).
    While it is well known that the elasticity model induced by the Hencky energy does not provide an accurate description of very
large deformations (Anand, 1979; Ogden et al., 2004), it is indeed highly accurate for up to moderate strains of about 20% (Anand,
1979). Moreover, the relation between the elastic behavior predicted by the Hencky model and the experimental data used to
determine the parameters is clearly accessible to direct interpretation: The shear modulus and the bulk modulus are determined by
the material’s response to shear stresses and hydrostatic pressure, respectively, and in turn influence the stress response to certain
modes of deformation, namely to simple shear and purely volumetric strain. In particular, this direct correspondence between the
parameter values and the model’s behavior can be used to examine the plausibility of a specific parameter set, even in the absence
of additional test data.
    Moreover, Hencky deduced his material model from a number of simple axiomatic assumptions (Hencky, 1928, 1929; Neff et al.,
2016, 2020). The applicability of his model to deformations not included in prior experiments can therefore be based on whether
or not (or rather: to what degree) his postulates hold under the new circumstances. It is thereby possible to reasonably assess the
limitations of Hencky’s model.
    This direct correspondence between the mechanical–geometrical interpretation of the model and its parameters can no longer be
established for other hyperelastic material models, especially for so-called phenomenological (or ‘‘heuristic’’) models. For example,
the Ogden energy, which can be expressed in terms of the singular values 𝜆1 , 𝜆2 , 𝜆3 of 𝐹 via
                                                    ∑
                                                    𝑀
                                                      𝜇𝑖         𝛼     𝛼     𝛼
        𝑊 OG ∶ GL+ (3) → R ,          𝑊 OG (𝐹 ) =              (𝜆1𝑖 + 𝜆2𝑖 + 𝜆3𝑖 − 3) ,                                                                       (38)
                                                    𝑖=1
                                                          𝛼𝑖

with 2𝑀 parameters 𝜇𝑖 > 0, 𝛼𝑖 ∈ R, can provide a much better fit to empirical observations than the Hencky model for very large
deformations (Ogden et al., 2004) if the number 2𝑀 of material parameters is sufficiently high. However, there is no longer any
intuitive relation between these parameters and the predicted material behavior.
    Furthermore, the (globally) optimal choice of parameters for fitting the energy to a given dataset is difficult to determine due
to the strongly nonlinear dependence of the induced stress–strain relation on the parameter values (Ogden et al., 2004). Therefore,
in practice, the result of the parameter optimization is not fully determined by the measured empirical data, but also affected by

                                                                                  18
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                   Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


the random influence of, for example, the chosen starting points of the optimization algorithm. In particular, two possible outcomes
of such an optimization procedure might yield a similar (or even an identical) quality of fit for the Ogden model to the limited
experimental data, whereas the material behavior predicted by those two distinct optimized models for other deformations might
differ significantly. Therefore, a high degree of uncertainty must remain about the prediction quality exhibited by material models
such as Ogden’s, particularly when applied to deformations which are not included in (or closely related to) the original experimental
observations. This problem is closely related to the more general notion of overfitting, i.e. optimizing too specifically to a given
dataset, which tends to occur for model functions with a high number of parameters.

6.2. Data-driven models

    Machine-learning based approaches share and even amplify these shortcomings of highly complex phenomenological models.
Due to the general nature of data-driven methods, the number of parameters required for closely fitting such a model to a given
specific dataset is necessarily rather high, even when compared to complex models such as the Ogden energy. In addition, for most
machine learning methods used today (including neural networks), the resulting model cannot (easily) be stated explicitly in the
form of a closed-form analytical expression. It is therefore extremely difficult, if not impossible, to develop an intuitive understanding
of the relation between such a data-driven model and its parameters on the one hand and the predicted material behavior on the
other.
    Of course, these problems have been recognized in many other fields of research where machine learning techniques have
been applied, and a number of approaches have been suggested to determine not only the influence of different parameters
on the prediction, but also the direct relation between the training data and the resulting output in a humanly comprehensible
fashion (Lundberg and Lee, 2017; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Štrumbelj and Kononenko, 2014). However, these techniques still lack
the reliability and the direct intuition offered by more traditional models.
    Similarly, the phenomenon of overfitting is a well known issue in the field of machine learning, and a number of precautions
(such as the careful distinction between training and validation data) are taken in order to alleviate this problem. However, since
any form of validation or testing is still based on available experimental data, any assumptions about the applicability of these
models to circumstances outside the range of prior observations must remain unfounded even in the best of cases.
    Thus, we consider it as extremely important to inform machine learning models with as much physical and mathematical
structure as possible (as done here with the hyperelasticity, anisotropy, objectivity, and polyconvexity properties) and apply them
only in cases where classical approaches cannot provide an acceptable accuracy (as is the case here due to the strong nonlinearity
of the lattice microstructures).
    Finally, and perhaps most importantly, even if the resulting trained algorithm does indeed provide an accurate model in all
practically relevant situations, it does not offer any insight as to why its predictions are accurate. Again, this can be contrasted with
the aforementioned Hencky elasticity model: Although not deduced ab initio, the model has indeed been developed originally by
Heinrich Hencky from simple geometrical and mechanical considerations, and a careful study of his deductions can without doubt
further the reader’s understanding of continuum mechanics in a way that cannot be matched by inspecting the ‘‘black box’’ that
results from training a machine learning algorithm.
    Of course, the above considerations are not restricted to applications of data-driven models to nonlinear elasticity theory, but
equally apply to many other domains of the natural sciences where machine learning has recently been demonstrated to yield
promising results. Machine-learning based approaches can (and will) most certainly be employed to improve the accuracy of
predictions and thus the quality of models and simulations in the years to come, most likely resulting in considerable technological
advancements. However, for the reasons outlined above, machine learning should not be considered as a full-fledged replacement
of more traditional, analytical models, now or in the future, even if the outcomes seem to match or even surpass those resulting
from more classical approaches. In the past, humanity has found a major motivation for developing a further understanding of
nature in the dependence of (practically applicable) scientific techniques on the scientific method (Russell, 1931), and it would be
most unfortunate if the success of machine learning in advancing the former would lead us to neglect the latter.

7. Conclusion

    In the present work, two machine learning based constitutive models are proposed, which fulfill the polyconvexity condition
by using input convex neural networks. This implies ellipticity of the constitutive models, which ensures material stability. The
hyperelastic models are formulated for finite deformations and anisotropic material behavior. Furthermore, the neural networks
yield highly flexible constitutive models, which are adaptable to a wide range of materials.
    The first model 𝑊 I is based on a set of polyconvex, anisotropic invariants proposed by Schröder et al. (2010), see Eqs. (13) and
(15), which fulfill the material objectivity and material symmetry conditions by construction. The neural network core is able to
create highly nonlinear functions from the invariants, while conventional models are restricted to comparatively simple polynomials.
Depending on the anisotropy class, various sets of invariants can be used.
    The second model 𝑊 F fully exploits the approximation capabilities of artificial neural networks. Formulated in the deformation
gradient, its cofactor and determinant, the material objectivity condition is not fulfilled by construction, which would be a major
drawback for conventional constitutive models. In the context of machine learning, however, the model is trained to approximate
the objectivity condition, using data augmentation of the calibration dataset, cf. (22), which is possible due to the high flexibility
of the models, and the high-performing optimization algorithms available in several machine learning libraries, e.g., TensorFlow.

                                                                   19
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


The present work not only uses the potential values, as done in Ling et al. (2016), but also the stress values. This is convenient as
the stress is the quantity of interest for many applications of the constitutive model, and furthermore, the general approximation
quality of the model can benefit from the additional information that the augmented stress values provide. For incorporating the
material symmetry, the group symmetrization introduced in Fernández et al. (2021b) is used, see Eq. (20).
    The model capabilities are examined with synthetic homogenization data of cubic metamaterials used in Fernández et al.
(2021b), and compared to the polyconvex model proposed by Schröder et al. (2010). The simulation data offers a highly challenging
benchmark case, with characteristics like lattice instabilities for several deformation modes. The analytical model from Schröder
et al. (2010) is not able to capture the behavior of the material, even for the uniaxial deformation case. The model 𝑊 F shows
excellent performance, not only for the calibration data, but also for several test scenarios which were not included in the training
of the model. The evaluation of the model 𝑊 I gave acceptable results for deformation gradients with dominating main diagonal
elements, but failed to represent the stress response for shear deformations. However, when fitted to data generated from the
analytical, transversely isotropic model from Schröder et al. (2008), which represents a real-world material, the model 𝑊 I also
delivered excellent results. This shows that both models are applicable to a wide class of anisotropic materials, while 𝑊 F is preferable
for highly challenging metamaterials. Apparently, the polyconvexity conditions greatly improves the generalization capabilities of
ANN-based constitutive models, such that they can be trained on fairly small training datasets. Here, deformation modes which
are commonly applied in physical experiments were used. Nevertheless, due to their high flexibility, the models can benefit from a
wider range of calibration data and yield even better results. The data augmentation approach for the calibration of the model 𝑊 F
does not require additional simulation or experimental data, the extended dataset is created purely from mechanical considerations.
    The models are formulated as general as possible, and can be adapted to a wide range of anisotropic, hyperelastic materials. It
lies in the very nature of machine learning that constitutive models based on neural networks are, to some extent, more complex
than their conventional counterparts. As to what extent, the present work suggests that there are two major ways: For a wide range
of materials with a moderately challenging behavior, very small ML models can be used, c.f. the excellent performance of the small
invariant based model in Section 5. The model complexity of this approach is close to the one of analytical potentials, without the
need to manually construct a function for the specific material behavior at hand. However, for very complex material behavior, the
full flexibility of neural networks can be utilized by using bigger networks, c.f. the deformation gradient based model in Section 4. In
both cases, the application to finite element simulations will be important for future research. Considering the infinitely continuously
differentiable neural network cores and the ellipticity of the proposed models, they offer a straightforward adaption for this, with
favorable numerical behavior and trivial computation of stress and stiffness tensors, if automatic differentiation functionalities are
considered. For future work, it would be valuable to investigate the formulation of polyconvex FFNNs with a volumetric–deviatoric
decomposition of the deformation gradient for (nearly) incompressible materials. Furthermore, the incorporation of parametric
dependencies, such as the aspect ratio of a microstructure, into polyconvex FFNNs should be investigated.


CRediT authorship contribution statement


   Dominik K. Klein: Conceptualization, Software, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Mauricio Fernández:
Conceptualization, Software, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Robert J. Martin: Conceptualization, Writing – review &
editing. Patrizio Neff: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Oliver Weeger: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing,
Supervision.


Declaration of competing interest


    The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.


Data availability


   The authors provide access to the complete simulation data required to reproduce the results through the public GitHub repository
https://github.com/CPShub/sim-data


Acknowledgments


    The work of Dominik Klein is supported by the Graduate School CE within the Centre for Computational Engineering at Technical
University of Darmstadt, Germany. Patrizio Neff acknowledges support in the framework of the DFG-Priority Programme 2256
‘‘Variational Methods for Predicting Complex Phenomena in Engineering Structures and Materials’’, Neff 902/10-1, Project-No.
440935806.

                                                                   20
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                    Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


Appendix. Input convex feed-forward neural networks

   FFNNs are a special class of artificial neural networks, which can be recursively defined as the composition of several vector-
valued functions (Aggarwal, 2018; Kollmannsberger et al., 2021). The components of the vectors are referred to as nodes or neurons,
the function in each neuron is referred to as activation function.

Definition A.1 (Feed-Forward Neural Networks (FFNNs)). The FFNN with vector-valued input 𝑋, 𝐻 hidden layers and scalar-valued
output function 𝑎 is given by
                                           [0]
                              𝑋 ∈ R𝑛
                  ( [1]        )     [1]
           𝐴1 = 𝐴1 𝑊 𝑋 + 𝑏[1] ∈ R𝑛 ,
                ( [ℎ]          )     [ℎ]
                                                                                                                                              (A.1)
        𝐴ℎ = 𝐴ℎ 𝑊 𝐴ℎ−1 + 𝑏[ℎ] ∈ R𝑛 ,             ℎ = 2, … , 𝐻
            ( [𝐻+1]            )
        𝑎=𝑎 𝑊       𝐴𝐻 + 𝑏[𝐻+1] ∈ R.
                      [ℎ]   [ℎ−1]                [ℎ]
Weights 𝑊 [ℎ] ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑛       and bias 𝑏[ℎ] ∈ R𝑛 form the set of parameters, which is optimized when the model is calibrated. 𝑋 and
𝑎 are referred to as input and output layer, respectively, while the layers 𝐴ℎ are referred to as hidden layers with component-wise
applied activation functions according to
                        (        )           (             )𝑇
       (𝐴 (𝑊 𝑋))𝑖 = 𝐴𝑖 ⟨𝑤[𝑖] , 𝑋⟩ ,     𝑊 = 𝑤[1] , … , 𝑤[𝑛] .                                                                 (A.2)

We apply the short notation for feed-forward neural networks

        𝑎◦◦𝑋                                                                                                                                 (A.3)

with the networks core  = 𝐴𝐻 ◦ … ◦𝐴1 .

Definition A.2 (Input Convex Neural Networks (ICNNs)). The FFNN 𝑎 = 𝑎◦◦𝑋 is called an ICNN, when the scalar-valued output 𝑎
is convex w.r.t. the vector-valued input 𝑋 (Amos et al., 2017).

    Sufficiency conditions for the fulfillment of convexity in the case of function compositions are given in the following theorem.

Theorem A.3.        The function 𝑎̄ = 𝑎◦𝐵◦𝑋 is convex in 𝑋 if the function 𝑎 is convex and non-decreasing in 𝐵, and 𝐵 is component-wise
convex in 𝑋.

Proof. We have to show the positive semi-definiteness of the function’s Hessian (Hartmann and Neff, 2003; Silhavy, 2014):
       2
             (    )𝑇   2                    2
      𝐷𝑋 𝑎̄ = 𝐷𝑋 𝐵 ⋅ 𝐷𝐵  𝑎 ⋅ 𝐷𝑋 𝐵 + 𝐷𝐵 𝑎 ⋅ 𝐷𝑋 𝐵                                                                           (A.4)

The derivatives 𝐷𝑋 𝐵 are mappings from the vector space 𝑋 into the vector space 𝐵. When 𝑎 is chosen as a convex function of 𝐵, the
Hessian of 𝑎 w.r.t. 𝐵 is positive semi-definite and hence the first term in Eq. (A.4) is positive semi-definite, see also observation 7.1.8
in Horn and Johnson (2013). The second term in Eq. (A.4) is positive semi-definite when 𝑎 is non-decreasing in every component
of 𝐵, and 𝐵 is component-wise convex in 𝑋. □

Corollary A.4. A FFNN is convex, when (i) the first hidden layer of the network’s core is component-wise convex w.r.t. the input, (ii) every
following hidden layer is component-wise convex and non-decreasing w.r.t. the previous layer, and (iii) the scalar-valued output function is
convex and non-decreasing w.r.t. the last hidden layer.

Proof. This follows by recursively applying Theorem A.3 to the components of the hidden layers.               □

Theorem A.5.        Convexity is preserved under affine transformations.

    The proof is clear but we provide it for the convenience of the reader.
                                                                                                        ( )
                                                                                                         ̃ = 𝑎 (𝑋 𝐶 + 𝐷) with
Proof. The Hessian of the convex function 𝑎 applied on an affine transformation of its argument, i.e., 𝑎 𝑋
arbitrary, but constant 𝐶 and 𝐷, is positive semi-definite.
               (     )
       𝐷𝑋2
           𝑎 = 𝐷𝑋 𝑋̃ 𝑇 ⋅ 𝐷2 𝑎 ⋅ 𝐷𝑋 𝑋
                                   ̃ + 𝐷 ̃ 𝑎 ⋅ 𝐷2 𝑋
                                                  ̃                                                                     (A.5)
                           ̃        𝑋   𝑋       𝑋

The positive semi-definiteness of the first summand follows equivalent to Eq. (A.4), while the second summand vanishes due to the
             ̃ in 𝑋. □
linearity of 𝑋

Corollary A.6. Due to its linearity, the bias of convex FFNNs can be chosen arbitrarily in every layer. The input of a convex FFNN can
be multiplied by any constant matrix.

                                                                      21
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                       Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


   With Corollaries A.4 and A.6, convex neural networks can be constructed. In the first step, this requires the choice of a convex
and non-decreasing activation function. Furthermore, the activation function should be sufficiently smooth, as the calculation of
gradients plays an important role in continuum mechanics. All of the former requirements can be fulfilled by the following functions.

Theorem A.7 (Log-Sum-Exp Function). The Log-Sum-Exp function is defined as
                                     ∑
                                     𝑚
        𝑓 ∶ R𝑚 → R,    𝑓 (𝑥) = log         𝑒𝑥𝑙 .                                                                                                 (A.6)
                                     𝑙=1

We use the adaption 𝑓0 (𝑥) = 𝑓 (0, 𝑥), since it is closely linked to the Softplus function, see Corollary A.8. Using the weight matrix 𝑊 ∈ R𝑚×𝑛
as defined in Eq. (A.2) and the bias vector 𝑏 ∈ R𝑚 , we obtain the adapted Log-Sum-Exp function
                                                              [                       ]
                                                                   ∑𝑚
                𝑛                                                        ⟨𝑤[𝑙] ,𝑋⟩+𝑏𝑙
        ∶ R → R, (𝑋) = 𝑓0 (𝑊 𝑋 + 𝑏) = log 1 +                    𝑒                                                                   (A.7)
                                                                𝑙=1

for neural networks. The  function is convex for arbitrary weights and bias, and non-decreasing when all weights are non-negative. It
is smooth for any choice of arguments or parameters, i.e.,  ∈ 𝐶 ∞ (R𝑛 ).

Proof. We first show the convexity of the adapted softplus function 𝑓0 by proving the positive semi-definiteness of the Hessian
𝐷𝑥2 𝑓0 (𝑥). For this, we simply observe that the inequality
                                             [𝑚          ][             ] [𝑚           ]2
                                            ⎛ ∑                ∑𝑚          ∑              ⎞
                  2              1          ⎜       2 𝑥𝑙             𝑥𝑙             𝑥𝑙    ⎟
        0 ≤ 𝑣 ⋅ 𝐷𝑥 𝑓0 ⋅ 𝑣 = (  ∑         )        𝑣   𝑒    1 +     𝑒     −     𝑣 𝑙 𝑒                                      (A.8)
                                       𝑥𝑙 2 ⎜ 𝑙=1                                         ⎟
                                                    𝑙
                             1+ 𝑚𝑙=1 𝑒      ⎝                  𝑙=1         𝑙=1            ⎠
holds for any 𝑣 ∈ R𝑚 since, due to the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality,
       [𝑚           ]2 [ 𝑚                   ]2 [ 𝑚       ][ 𝑚      ] [𝑚       ][          ]
        ∑               ∑                        ∑          ∑          ∑            ∑
                                                                                    𝑚
                 𝑥𝑙            𝑥𝑙 ∕2   𝑥𝑙 ∕2         2 𝑥𝑙        𝑥𝑙       2 𝑥𝑙          𝑥𝑙
            𝑣𝑙 𝑒      =    𝑣𝑙 𝑒      ⋅𝑒        ≤    𝑣𝑙 𝑒       𝑒     ≤   𝑣𝑙 𝑒    1+   𝑒      .                                                   (A.9)
           𝑙=1           𝑙=1                       𝑙=1        𝑙=1          𝑙=1             𝑙=1

The  function is obtained through the linear transformation

        (𝑋) = 𝑓0 (𝑥) ,      𝑥=𝑊 𝑋+𝑏                                                                                                         (A.10)

of the convex function 𝑓0 . Linear transformations preserve convexity, therefore the  function is also convex. The first derivative
of the  function
                        ∑𝑚       [𝑙] ⟨𝑤[𝑙] ,𝑋⟩
       [           ]       𝑙=1 𝑤𝑖 𝑒
         𝐷𝑋 (𝑋) 𝑖 =       ∑                                                                                                  (A.11)
                        1+ 𝑚   𝑙=1 𝑒
                                     ⟨𝑤[𝑙] ,𝑋⟩


is non-negative for 𝑤[𝑙]
                     𝑖 ≥ 0 ∀ 𝑖, 𝑙. The smoothness of the functions follows from the smoothness of the exponential function, and the
smoothness of the logarithm on the positive domain. □

Corollary A.8 (Softplus Function). For 𝑚 = 1 in Eq. (A.7), the  function is reduced to the Softplus () function
                                    [           ]
       ∶ R𝑛 → R, (𝑋) = log 1 + 𝑒⟨𝑤,𝑋⟩+𝑏                                                                                                    (A.12)

with weights 𝑤 ∈ R𝑛 and bias 𝑏 ∈ R. The  function is convex for arbitrary weights and bias, and non-decreasing when all weights are
non-negative. It is smooth for any choice of arguments or parameters.

Proposition A.9 (ICNNs using  and  Functions). ICNNs based on  functions are built from multiple layers, with several nodes
using  activation functions in each layer. For the first hidden layer, the weights of the softplus functions can take arbitrary values, while
the other layers must be non-decreasing functions and, therefore, use non-negative weights. The networks output is given as the non-negative
weighted sum of the last  layer. The bias in every layer can be chosen arbitrarily.
    ICNNs based on  functions can be composed of either a single  function, or of several  functions. In the first case, the 
function can be understood as a composition of one layer with several nodes using exponential activation functions, which are summed up
and logarithmized in the next layer. The function achieves its approximation properties by increasing the amount of nodes in the exponential
layer. As the exponential layer is the first hidden layer, the weights can be chosen arbitrarily. Alternatively, the convex neural network can
be constructed using several  functions. We obtain this approach similar to the one introduced for  functions, just by replacing the
 functions by  functions. In both cases, the bias in every layer can be chosen arbitrarily.

Remark A.10. Constitutive models are often formulated in sets of invariants. In doing so, several important properties are fulfilled
already by the choice of the input quantity. When a set of invariants is used for a ML model, the networks core must not only be
convex, but also non-decreasing in its input, which follows directly from Eq. (A.4). Since the invariants are created by nonlinear
functions, e.g., 𝐼1 = tr(𝐹 𝑇 𝐹 ), the subsequent function processing the invariants must be convex and non-decreasing in order to be
convex in (𝐹 , Cof 𝐹 , det 𝐹 ). For cores based on  or  functions, this can easily be achieved by using non-negative weights in
the first layer.

                                                                      22
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                   Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


Remark A.11. The  activation function is not included in the current TensorFlow version, and was manually implemented.
While  based cores should benefit from the highly flexible activation function and yield excellent results, the convergence
behavior during training was very slow, and no satisfying results could be obtained. However, this should be seen as a numerical
drawback of the implementation and optimization approaches used in this work rather than a general drawback of the function
itself. Thus, only  based cores were used for the numerical investigations shown in Section 4.

References

Aggarwal, C.C., 2018. Neural Networks and Deep Learning, first ed. Springer International Publishing.
Amos, B., Xu, L., Kolter, J.Z., 2017. Input convex neural networks. In: Precup, D., Teh, Y.W. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
     Learning. In: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 70, PMLR, pp. 146–155, arXiv:1609.07152.
Anand, L., 1979. On H. Hencky’s approximate strain energy function for moderate deformations. J. Appl. Mech. 46, 78–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.3424532.
Ball, J.M., 1976. Convexity conditions and existence theorems in nonlinear elasticity. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 63 (4), 337–403. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
     BF00279992.
Ball, J.M., 1977. Constitutive inequalities and existence theorems in nonlinear elasto-statics. In: Knops, R.J. (Ed.), Herriot Watt Symposion: Nonlinear Analysis
     and Mechanics, Vol. 1. Pitman, London, pp. 187–241.
Balzani, D., Neff, P., Schröder, J., Holzapfel, G.A., 2006. A polyconvex framework for soft biological tissues. Adjustment to experimental data. Int. J. Solids
     Struct. 43 (20), 6052–6070. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2005.07.048.
Baydin, A., Pearlmutter, B., Radul, A., Siskind, J., 2018. Automatic differentiation in machine learning: A survey. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18, 1–43, arXiv:1502.05767.
Bertoldi, K., Vitelli, V., Christensen, J., van Hecke, M., 2017. Flexible mechanical metamaterials. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2 (11), 1–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
     natrevmats.2017.66, Number: 11 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Bertram, A., 2021. Elasticity and Plasticity of Large Deformations, fourth ed. Springer International Publishing.
Bonet, J., Gil, A.J., Ortigosa, R., 2015. A computational framework for polyconvex large strain elasticity. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 283, 1061–1094.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2014.10.002.
Cai, R., Holweck, F., Feng, Z.-Q., Peyraut, F., 2021. Integrity basis of polyconvex invariants for modeling hyperelastic orthotropic materials — Application to
     the mechanical response of passive ventricular myocardium. Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 133, 103713. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnonlinmec.2021.103713.
Calafiore, G.C., Gaubert, S., Possieri, C., 2020a. A universal approximation result for difference of log-sum-exp neural networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
     Syst. PP, 1–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2975051.
Calafiore, G.C., Gaubert, S., Possieri, C., 2020b. Log-sum-exp neural networks and posynomial models for convex and log-log-convex data. IEEE Trans. Neural
     Netw. Learn. Syst. 31 (3), 827–838. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2910417.
Carrara, P., De Lorenzis, L., Stainier, L., Ortiz, M., 2020. Data-driven fracture mechanics. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 372, 113390. http://dx.doi.org/
     10.1016/j.cma.2020.113390.
Chagnon, G., Rebouah, M., Favier, D., 2015. Hyperelastic energy densities for soft biological tissues: A review. J. Elasticity 120 (2), 129–160. http://dx.doi.org/
     10.1007/s10659-014-9508-z.
E, W., Han, J., Zhang, L., 2020. Integrating machine learning with physics-based modeling. Pre-Print under Review. arXiv:2006.02619.
Ebbing, V., 2010. Design of Polyconvex Energy Functions for All Anisotropy Classes (Ph.D. thesis). Universität Duisburg-Essen.
Ehret, A., Itskov, M., 2007. A polyconvex hyperelastic model for fiber-reinforced materials in application to soft tissues. J. Mater. Sci. 42, 8853–8863.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10853-007-1812-6.
Fernández, M., Fritzen, F., Weeger, O., 2021a. Material modeling for parametric finite hyperelasticity based on machine learning with application in optimization
     of metamaterials. http://dx.doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.21536.10242, Pre-Print under Review.
Fernández, M., Jamshidian, M., Böhlke, T., Kersting, K., Weeger, O., 2021b. Anisotropic hyperelastic constitutive models for finite deformations combining material
     theory and data-driven approaches with application to cubic lattice metamaterials. Comput. Mech. 67 (2), 653–677. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00466-020-
     01954-7.
Flaschel, M., Kumar, S., De Lorenzis, L., 2021. Unsupervised discovery of interpretable hyperelastic constitutive laws. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 381,
     113852. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2021.113852.
Fritzen, F., Fernández, M., Larsson, F., 2019. On-the-fly adaptivity for nonlinear twoscale simulations using artificial neural networks and reduced order modeling.
     Front. Mater. 6, 75. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmats.2019.00075.
Fritzen, F., Kunc, O., 2018. Two-stage data-driven homogenization for nonlinear solids using a reduced order model. Eur. J. Mech. A Solids 69, 201–220.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.euromechsol.2017.11.007.
Ghaderi, A., Morovati, V., Dargazany, R., 2020. A physics-informed assembly of feed-forward neural network engines to predict inelasticity in cross-linked
     polymers. Polymers 12, http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/polym12112628.
Ghiba, I.-D., Martin, R.J., Neff, P., 2018. Rank-one convexity implies polyconvexity in isotropic planar incompressible elasticity. J. Math. Pures Appl. 116,
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.matpur.2018.06.009.
Glaesener, R.N., Träff, E.A., Telgen, B., Canonica, R.M., Kochmann, D.M., 2020. Continuum representation of nonlinear three-dimensional periodic truss networks
     by on-the-fly homogenization. Int. J. Solids Struct. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2020.08.013.
González, D., Chinesta, F., Cueto, E., 2019. Learning corrections for hyperelastic models from data. Front. Mater. 6, 14. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmats.2019.
     00014.
González, D., García, A., Chinesta, F., Cueto, E., 2020. A data-driven learning method for constitutive modeling: Application to vascular hyperelastic soft tissues.
     Materials 13, 2319. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ma13102319.
Hartmann, S., Neff, P., 2003. Polyconvexity of generalized polynomial-type hyperelastic strain energy funtions for near-incompressibility. Int. J. Solids Struct.
     40, 2767–2791. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0020-7683(03)00086-6.
Haupt, P., 2002. Continuum Mechanics and Theory of Materials, second ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Heider, Y., Wang, K., Sun, W., 2020. SO(3)-invariance of informed-graph-based deep neural network for anisotropic elastoplastic materials. Comput. Methods
     Appl. Mech. Engrg. 363, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2020.112875.
Hencky, H., 1928. Über die Form des Elastizitätsgesetzes bei ideal elastischen Stoffen. Z. Tech. Phys. 9, 215–220.
Hencky, H., 1929. Welche Umstände bedingen die Verfestigung bei der bildsamen Verformung von festen isotropen Körpern? Z. Phys. 55, 145–155.
Holzapfel, G.A., 2000. Nonlinear Solid Mechanics: A Continuum Approach for Engineering, second ed. Wiley.
Horn, R.A., Johnson, C.R., 2013. Matrix Analysis, second ed. Cambridge University Press, USA.
Hornik, K., 1991. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks. Neural Netw. 4 (2), 251–257. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(91)90009-T.
Itskov, M., 2001. A generalized orthotropic hyperelastic material model with application to incompressible shells. Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 50,
     1777–1799. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nme.86.
Itskov, M., Aksel, N., 2004. A class of orthotropic and transversely isotropic hyperelastic constitutive models based on a polyconvex strain energy function. Int.
     J. Solids Struct. 41, 3833–3848. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2004.02.027.


                                                                                23
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                    Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


Jamshidian, M., Boddeti, N., Rosen, D.W., Weeger, O., 2020. Multiscale modelling of soft lattice metamaterials: Micromechanical nonlinear buckling analysis,
    experimental verification, and macroscale constitutive behaviour. Int. J. Mech. Sci. 188, 105956. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2020.105956.
Jiang, Y., 2016. Highly-stretchable 3D-architected mechanical metamaterials. Sci. Rep. 6, 34147. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep34147.
Kambouchev, N., Fernandez, J., Radovitzky, R., 2007. A polyconvex model for materials with cubic symmetry. Modelling Simulation Mater. Sci. Eng. 15, 451.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0965-0393/15/5/006.
Karniadakis, G.E., Kevrekidis, I.G., Lu, L., Perdikaris, P., Wang, S., Yang, L., 2021. Physics-informed machine learning. Nat. Rev. Phys. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
    s42254-021-00314-5.
Khajehtourian, R., Kochmann, D., 2020. A continuum description of substrate-free dissipative reconfigurable metamaterials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 147,
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2020.104217.
Khajehtourian, R., Kochmann, D., 2021. Soft adaptive mechanical metamaterials. Front. Robot. AI 8, 673478. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2021.673478.
Kirchdoerfer, T., Ortiz, M., 2016. Data-driven computational mechanics. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 304, 81–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.
    2016.02.001.
Kollmannsberger, S., D’Angella, D., Jokeit, M., Herrmann, L., 2021. Deep Learning in Computational Mechanics. In: Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol.
    977, Springer, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-76587-3.
Kružík, M., Roubíček, T., 2019. Mathematical Methods in Continuum Mechanics of Solids, first ed. Springer International Publishing.
Kunc, O., Fritzen, F., 2019. Finite strain homogenization using a reduced basis and efficient sampling. Math. Comput. Appl. 24 (2), 56. http://dx.doi.org/10.
    3390/mca24020056.
Le, B.A., Yvonnet, J., He, Q.-C., 2015. Computational homogenization of nonlinear elastic materials using neural networks. Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg.
    104 (12), 1061–1084. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nme.4953.
Lee, J.-H., Singer, J.P., Thomas, E.L., 2012. Micro-/nanostructured mechanical metamaterials. Adv. Mater. (Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 24 (36), 4782—4810.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/adma.201201644.
Ling, J., Jones, R., Templeton, J., 2016. Machine learning strategies for systems with invariance properties. J. Comput. Phys. 318, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
    jcp.2016.05.003.
Linka, K., Hillgärtner, M., Abdolazizi, K., Aydin, R., Itskov, M., Cyron, C., 2020. Constitutive artificial neural networks: A fast and general approach to predictive
    data-driven constitutive modeling by deep learning. J. Comput. Phys. 110010. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.110010.
Liu, J., Gu, T., Shan, S., Kang, S., Weaver, J., Bertoldi, K., 2016. Harnessing buckling to design architected materials that exhibit effective negative swelling.
    Adv. Mater. 28, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/adma.201600812.
Liu, M., Liang, L., Sun, W., 2020. A generic physics-informed neural network-based constitutive model for soft biological tissues. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech.
    Engrg. 372, 113402. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2020.113402.
Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.-I., 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 4765–4774,
    arXiv:1705.07874.
Martin, R.J., Ghiba, I.-D., Neff, P., 2018. A non-ellipticity result, or the impossible taming of the logarithmic strain measure. Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 102,
    147–158. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnonlinmec.2018.02.011.
Martin, R.J., Ghiba, I.-D., Neff, P., 2019. A polyconvex extension of the logarithmic Hencky strain energy. Anal. Appl. 17 (03), 349–361. http://dx.doi.org/10.
    1142/S0219530518500173.
Martin, R.J., Voss, J., Ghiba, I.-D., Neff, P., 2020a. Rank-one convexity vs. ellipticity for isotropic functions. Pre-Print under Review. arXiv:2008.11631.
Martin, R.J., Voss, J., Ghiba, I.-D., Sander, O., Neff, P., 2020b. The quasiconvex envelope of conformally invariant planar energy functions in isotropic
    hyperelasticity. J. Nonlinear Sci. 30, 2885–2923. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00332-020-09639-4.
Matous, K., Geers, M., Kouznetsova, V., Gillman, A., 2016. A review of predictive nonlinear theories for multiscale modeling of heterogeneous materials. J.
    Comput. Phys. 330, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2016.10.070.
Neff, P., Eidel, B., Martin, R.J., 2016. Geometry of logarithmic strain measures in solid mechanics. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 222 (2), 507–572. http:
    //dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00205-016-1007-x.
Neff, P., Ghiba, I.-D., Lankeit, J., 2015. The exponentiated Hencky-logarithmic strain energy. Part I: Constitutive issues and rank-one convexity. J. Elasticity 121,
    143–234. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10659-015-9524-7.
Neff, P., Graban, K., Schweickert, E., Martin, R.J., 2020. The axiomatic introduction of arbitrary strain tensors by Hans Richter – A commented translation of
    ‘Strain tensor, strain deviator and stress tensor for finite deformations’. Math. Mech. Solids 25 (5), 1060–1080, arXiv:1909.05998.
Nguyen, L.T.K., Keip, M.-A., 2018. A data-driven approach to nonlinear elasticity. Comput. Struct. 194, 97–115. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2017.07.
    031.
Ogden, R.W., Saccomandi, G., Sgura, I., 2004. Fitting hyperelastic models to experimental data. Comput. Mech. 34 (6), 484–502. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
    s00466-004-0593-y.
Pfefferkorn, R., Betsch, P., 2019. Extension of the enhanced assumed strain method based on the structure of polyconvex strain-energy functions. Internat. J.
    Numer. Methods Engrg. 121, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nme.6284.
Russell, B., 1931. The Scientific Outlook. George Allen & Unwin.
Schröder, J., 2010. Anisotropic polyconvex energies. In: Schröder, J., Neff, P. (Eds.), Poly-, Quasi- and Rank-One Convexity in Applied Mechanics. In: CISM
    International Centre for Mechanical Sciences, Springer, Vienna, pp. 53–105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-0174-2_3.
Schröder, J., von Hoegen, M., Neff, P., 2018. The exponentiated Hencky energy: Anisotropic extension and case studies. Comput. Mech. 61, 657–685.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00466-017-1466-4.
Schröder, J., Neff, P., 2003. Invariant formulation of hyperelastic transverse isotropy based on polyconvex free energy functions. Int. J. Solids Struct. 40, 401–445.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0020-7683(02)00458-4.
Schröder, J., Neff, P., Balzani, D., 2005. A variational approach for materially stable anisotropic hyperelasticity. Int. J. Solids Struct. 42 (15), 4352–4371.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2004.11.021.
Schröder, J., Neff, P., Ebbing, V., 2008. Anisotropic polyconvex energies on the basis of crystallographic motivated structural tensors. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 56,
    3486–3506. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2008.08.008.
Schröder, J., Neff, P., Ebbing, V., 2010. Polyconvex energies for trigonal, tetragonal and cubic symmetry groups. In: Hackl, K. (Ed.), IUTAM Symposium on
    Variational Concepts with Applications to the Mechanics of Materials. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 221–232.
Shrikumar, A., Greenside, P., Kundaje, A., 2017. Learning important features through propagating activation differences. In: Precup, D., Teh, Y.W. (Eds.),
    Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning. In: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 70, PMLR, pp. 3145–3153,
    arXiv:1704.02685.
Silhavy, M., 2014. The Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Continuous Media, first ed. In: Theoretical and Mathematical Physics, Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Štrumbelj, E., Kononenko, I., 2014. Explaining prediction models and individual predictions with feature contributions. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 41 (3), 647–665.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10115-013-0679-x.
Surjadi, J.U., Gao, L., Du, H., Li, X., Xiong, X., Fang, N.X., Lu, Y., 2019. Mechanical metamaterials and their engineering applications. Advanced Engineering
    Materials 21 (3), 1800864. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/adem.201800864.
Tac, V., Sree, V.D., Rausch, M.K., Tepole, A.B., 2021. Data-driven modeling of the mechanical behavior of anisotropic soft biological tissue. Pre-Print under
    Review. arXiv:2107.05388.


                                                                                 24
D.K. Klein et al.                                                                                    Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 159 (2022) 104703


Truesdell, C., Noll, W., 2004. The Non-Linear Field Theories of Mechanics, third ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T.E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D., Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., van der Walt, S.J.,
    Brett, M., Wilson, J., Millman, K.J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A.R.J., Jones, E., Kern, R., Larson, E., Carey, C.J., Polat, I., Feng, Y., Moore, E.W., VanderPlas, J.,
    Laxalde, D., Perktold, J., Cimrman, R., Henriksen, I., Quintero, E.A., Harris, C.R., Archibald, A.M., Ribeiro, A.H., Pedregosa, F., van Mulbregt, P., SciPy 1.0
    Contributors, 2020. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature Methods 17, 261–272. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41592-
    019-0686-2.
Vlassis, N., Ma, R., Sun, W., 2020. Geometric deep learning for computational mechanics part I: Anisotropic hyperelasticity. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.
    371, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2020.113299.
Wang, S., Yu, X., Perdikaris, P., 2020. When and why PINNs fail to train: A neural tangent kernel perspective. Pre-Print under Review. arXiv:2007.14527.
Willard, J., Jia, X., Xu, S., Steinbach, M., Kumar, V., 2020. Integrating physics-based modeling with machine learning: A survey. Pre-Print under Review.
    arXiv:2003.04919.
Xiang, Y., Zhong, D., Rudykh, S., Zhou, H., Qu, S., Yang, W., 2020. A review of physically based and thermodynamically based constitutive models for soft
    materials. J. Appl. Mech. 87 (11), http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.4047776.
Xu, K., Huang, D., Darve, E., 2021. Learning constitutive relations using symmetric positive definite neural networks. J. Comput. Phys. 428, http://dx.doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jcp.2020.110072.
Yang, H., Guo, X., Tang, S., Liu, W.K., 2019. Derivation of heterogeneous material laws via data-driven principal component expansions. Comput. Mech. 64 (2),
    365–379. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00466-019-01728-w.
Yvonnet, J., Gonzalez, D., He, Q.-C., 2009. Numerically explicit potentials for the homogenization of nonlinear elastic heterogeneous materials. Comput. Methods
    Appl. Mech. Engrg. 198 (33), 2723–2737. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2009.03.017.
Yvonnet, J., He, Q.-C., 2007. The reduced model multiscale method (R3M) for the non-linear homogenization of hyperelastic media at finite strains. J. Comput.
    Phys. 223 (1), 341–368. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2006.09.019.
Zee, L., Sternberg, E.R., 1983. Ordinary and strong ellipticity in the equilibrium theory of incompressible hyperelastic solids. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 83,
    53–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00281087.
Zheng, Q.-S., Spencer, A.J., 1993. Tensors which characterize anisotropies. Internat. J. Engrg. Sci. 31 (5), 679–693. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0020-7225(93)
    90118-E.




                                                                                 25
