                                                      Advances in polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity
                                                              Dominik K. Klein1,* , Karl A. Kalina2 , Rogelio Ortigosa3 ,
                                                           Jesús Martínez-Frutos3 , Markus Kästner2 , and Oliver Weeger1
                                             1
                                              Cyber-Physical Simulation, Department of Mechanical Engineering, TU Darmstadt, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany
                                                                   2 Institute of Solid Mechanics, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
                                         3 Multiphysics Simulation and Optimization, TU Cartagena, Campus Muralla del Mar, 30202, Cartagena (Murcia), Spain
                                                                           * Corresponding author, email: klein@cps.tu-darmstadt.de




                                                                                           May 26, 2026
arXiv:2605.27011v1 [cs.CE] 26 May 2026




                                                                                               Abstract
                                                     A key challenge in material theory is the formulation of models that satisfy all common mechan-
                                                 ical constitutive conditions while retaining sufficient flexibility. In this context, several important
                                                 modeling aspects remain unresolved for polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity. We address some of
                                                 these challenges and apply our results for physics-augmented neural network (PANN) constitutive
                                                 modeling. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (1) We propose a new polycon-
                                                 vex PANN constitutive model for anisotropic hyperelasticity based on triclinic invariants and group
                                                 symmetrization. For finite symmetry groups, this model fulfills all common mechanical constitutive
                                                 conditions a priori. (2) We propose a group symmetrization-based method for the construction of
                                                 polyconvex invariants for finite symmetry groups. Based on this, we derive a new integrity basis for
                                                 a tetragonal symmetry group and a new functional basis for a cubic symmetry group. To the best
                                                 of our knowledge, these are the first polyconvex integrity or functional bases for symmetry groups
                                                 characterized by structural tensors of order higher than two. (3) We provide an extensive intro-
                                                 duction to the construction of polyconvex integrity and functional bases, which form the basis of
                                                 polyconvex invariant-based constitutive models. We discuss polyconvex bases for triclinic, isotropic,
                                                 transversely isotropic, monoclinic, rhombic, tetragonal, and cubic symmetry groups. (4) We bench-
                                                 mark the polyconvex PANN constitutive models with highly nonlinear homogenization data of cubic
                                                 metamaterials.

                                         Key words: polyconvexity, hyperelasticity, invariants, integrity basis, functional basis, physics-augmented
                                         neural networks, microstructured materials



                                         1       Introduction
                                         Constitutive modeling is one of the pillars of continuum solid mechanics and enables the mathematical
                                         description of the behavior of different materials. A fundamental prerequisite of constitutive modeling is
                                         the consideration of constitutive conditions, such as thermodynamic consistency and objectivity (Truesdell
                                         and Noll, 2004). By including these requirements in the model formulation, mechanically reasonable
                                         model predictions can be ensured. Moreover, by prescribing, to some extent, how the material model
                                         should behave, these conditions serve as an inductive bias (Haussler, 1988). This enables to calibrate
                                         constitutive models on sparse data while still accurately predicting the material behavior for previously
                                         unseen loading conditions. This paradigm has also been adopted in the emerging field of neural network
                                         (NN) constitutive modeling, where it is referred to as thermodynamics-based (Masi and Stefanou, 2022a),
                                         mechanics-informed (As’ad and Farhat, 2023), physics-based (Aldakheel et al., 2025), physics-constrained
                                         (Kalina et al., 2023), physics-augmented (Klein et al., 2022b), or constitutive artificial (Linka et al., 2020)
                                         NN modeling.1 One important constitutive condition is polyconvexity. Although research on polyconvex
                                         constitutive modeling is already highly advanced, several important aspects remain unresolved, some of
                                         which we address in this work.
                                            1 Throughout this work, we adopt the terminology physics-augmented neural networks (PANNs). The paradigm of

                                         combining machine learning methods with scientific knowledge is widely used in many scientific fields (Kannapinn et al.,
                                         2024; Karniadakis et al., 2021; Kumar and Kochmann, 2022; Peng et al., 2021; Von Rueden et al., 2021).


                                                                                                    1
1.1     Polyconvex constitutive modeling
In finite elasticity theory, convexity of the potential W in the deformation gradient F alone would be
overly restrictive and incompatible with a mechanically reasonable material behavior. Specifically, this
would be incompatible with growth and objectivity conditions, and for strict convexity, it would fail to
capture relevant phenomena like buckling (Ciarlet, 1988). In the seminal work by Ball (1976, 1977),
the polyconvexity condition was introduced. Polyconvex potentials are convex in an extended set of
arguments, including the deformation gradient F , its cofactor H = cof F , and its determinant J = det F ,
making this convexity condition compatible with aforementioned physical considerations. In constitutive
modeling, we employ polyconvexity for two reasons. First, it implies ellipticity (or material stability)
(Schröder et al., 2005), meaning a stable and robust behavior when applying the constitutive model
in numerical applications such as the finite element method. Second, polyconvexity serves as a strong
inductive bias that can improve the generalization behavior of the constitutive model, particularly for
extrapolation away from the calibration data (Kalina et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2026a). Moreover, from a
mathematical perspective, polyconvexity is linked to existence theorems in finite elasticity theory.
    Formulating material models which are not only polyconvex but also fulfill the remaining constitutive
conditions is a very ambitious task. For instance, objective deformation measures easily violate the poly-
convexity condition (cf. Eq. (19)). This does not mean that different constitutive conditions contradict
each other, but it illustrates the challenge of fulfilling them all at once. For almost three decades after
its initial conception, polyconvex constitutive modeling was practically limited to isotropic material be-
havior, with models formulated in terms of the main invariants of the right Cauchy-Green tensor C or
in terms of principal stretches (Ball, 1976; Ciarlet, 1988). In the landmark work of Schröder and Neff
(2003), for the first time, a polyconvex constitutive model applicable for anisotropic material behavior
was proposed, followed by Hartmann and Neff (2003), Itskov and Aksel (2004), Kambouchev et al. (2007),
Ehret and Itskov (2007), and Schröder et al. (2008). These approaches are based on polyconvex invari-
ants of C and a tuple of structural tensors. Making use of second- and fourth-order structural tensors,
polyconvex invariants are constructed for different material symmetry groups. By that, the models
fulfill objectivity and material symmetry a priori. Then, by a suitable construction of functions of these
invariants, the remaining conditions of hyperelasticity are included in the model, i.e., normalization and
growth conditions, while preserving the polyconvexity of the invariants in the model formulations.2
   A key prerequisite of polyconvex invariant-based constitutive modeling is the formulation of poly-
convex invariants and integrity or functional bases. The latter roughly means that a complete set of
invariants is available to fully represent the material behavior for the considered symmetry group in an
invariant-based framework. Polyconvex invariants for a variety anisotropies have been proposed in several
publications around twenty years ago (Kambouchev et al., 2007; Schröder and Neff, 2003; Schröder et al.,
2008, 2010).3 To the best of our knowledge, polyconvex integrity or functional bases have been proposed
only for the following symmetry groups, all of which can be fully characterized by structural tensors of
order up to two (Riemer et al., 2025):4 the isotropic K (Ball, 1976), transversely isotropic D∞ (Schröder
and Neff, 2003), triclinic C1 (Schröder et al., 2008), monoclinic C2 (Schröder et al., 2008), and rhombic D2
(Schröder and Neff, 2003) groups. In particular, we are not aware of polyconvex integrity or functional
bases for symmetry groups that require structural tensors of order higher than two, such as the triclinic
D4 or the cubic O group, which both require structural tensors of third or fourth order (Riemer et al.,
2025, Tab. 7). Thus, for most symmetry groups, polyconvex invariant-based constitutive models are
based on incomplete sets of invariants. This leads to a loss of information and limits the flexibility of the
models. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, general construction principles for polyconvex integrity
bases have not yet been discussed.

1.2     PANN constitutive modeling
Shifting the focus to the representation of material models, in recent years, PANN constitutive models
have gained considerable attention. NNs are highly flexible functions, in fact, some even have universal
approximation properties (Chen et al., 2019; Hornik, 1991). Consequently, using NNs as ansatz functions
for the constitutive model equations results in very flexible models that can represent highly nonlinear
   2 Notably, the polyconvexity condition has inspired a variety of numerical methods (Betsch et al., 2018; Bonet et al.,

2015; Franke et al., 2023; Schröder et al., 2011), and was also extended to electro-magneto-mechanical material behavior(Gil
and Ortigosa, 2016; Ortigosa and Gil, 2016; Silhavy, 2018).
   3 We provide a detailed discussion of polyconvex invariants and integrity or functional bases in Section 3.3.
   4 Throughout this work, we employ the Schoenflies notation to denote material symmetry groups.




                                                             2
material behavior.5 Flexibility is the key feature that differentiates PANN constitutive models from
conventional modeling approaches: the former are potentially way more flexible than the latter. By that,
PANN constitutive models find application where conventional models tend to fail. First of all, they can
accurately represent the highly nonlinear homogenized behavior of microstructured materials, enabling
efficient sequential multiscale simulations (Gärtner et al., 2021; Kalina et al., 2023; Masi and Stefanou,
2022b). Moreover, PANNs offer a unified modeling framework applicable to a wide range of different
material behaviors (Klein et al., 2026a; Peirlinck et al., 2025). This alleviates the challenging process
of selecting an appropriate conventional constitutive model from the broad range available (Hossain and
Steinmann, 2013; Ricker and Wriggers, 2023; Steinmann et al., 2012).
    Polyconvex PANN constitutive models were first introduced by Klein et al. (2022a). The approach
is based on input-convex neural networks (ICNNs), which were originally proposed in a different context
by Amos et al. (2017). Inspired from conventional constitutive models, polyconvex PANN models can be
formulated in terms of invariants. By using polyconvex invariants as inputs for a NN with suitable mono-
tonicity and convexity constraints, a polyconvex NN potential can be constructed (Klein et al., 2022a).
This constitutive modeling framework was later extended by invariant-based polyconvex stress normal-
ization terms, resulting in a PANN constitutive model that fulfills all common mechanical conditions of
compressible hyperelasticity by construction (Linden et al., 2023). As an alternative approach, in Klein
et al. (2022a), a polyconvex anisotropic PANN model formulated directly in the coordinates of the de-
formation gradient was proposed. Based on the deformation gradient directly, the latter approach is not
objective by construction but only learns to approximate this condition through data augmentation in
the calibration process. For isotropy, a variety of polyconvex PANN models based on principal stretches
have emerged (McCulloch et al., 2024; St. Pierre et al., 2023; Vijayakumaran et al., 2024). Notably,
in Geuken et al. (2025), a PANN model with universal approximation properties for polyconvex isotropic
material behavior is proposed, which is based on the signed singular values of the deformation gradient
(which are closely related to principal stretches) (Wiedemann and Peter, 2023). Apart from ICNN-based
formulations, polyconvex PANN models based on neural ordinary differential equations were proposed
(Taç et al., 2022).
    While the aforementioned works fulfill polyconvexity in an exact fashion, relaxed convexity conditions
have also been investigated, including strategies such as convexity-promoting loss terms together with
a relaxed local version of polyconvexity (Kalina et al., 2024), monotonicity of the NN potential (Klein
et al., 2026a), and convexity with respect to the coordinates of the right Cauchy-Green tensor C (As’ad
et al., 2022; L. Zheng et al., 2024), see Remark 4.2 for a discussion of the latter. Moreover, polyconvex
PANN models have been extended to parametrized (Klein et al., 2023), multiphysical (Fuhg et al., 2024;
Kalina et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2022b; Ortigosa et al., 2025), and inelastic material behavior (Boes et al.,
2026; Holthusen et al., 2026; Kalina et al., 2026; Zlatić and Čanađija, 2024).6
    To the best of our knowledge, polyconvex anisotropic PANN approaches that fulfill all common con-
stitutive conditions a priori are exclusively based on invariants of C and structural tensors. While these
models perform exceptionally well in a variety of applications (Klein et al., 2024), for some material
behaviors, they tend to fail (Kalina et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2022a). For polyconvex isotropic hyperelas-
ticity, it has been reported that the latter case can be addressed with alternative model formulations, e.g.,
using signed singular values instead of main invariants (Geuken et al., 2026). Even if different polyconvex
PANN models are similar in that they satisfy the same constitutive constraints a priori, their capability
to represent certain material behaviors can vary significantly (Wollner et al., 2026a). This suggests that,
also in the anisotropic case, the development of alternative model formulations may lead to an improved
predictive performance, and address potential drawbacks of existing approaches.

1.3     Main contributions and outline
The main contributions of this work are as follows:7 (1) We propose a new polyconvex PANN constitutive
model for anisotropic hyperelasticity based on triclinic invariants and group symmetrization. For finite
    5 Apart from NNs, a variety of sophisticated constitutive modeling approaches has emerged in recent years. For instance,

constitutive model equations have been formulated based on Gaussian process regression (Ellmer et al., 2024; Frankel et
al., 2020) or splines (Wiesheier et al., 2024). Moreover, methods have been proposed to automatically identify suitable
constitutive models out of a wide range of predefined models (Abbasi et al., 2026; Flaschel et al., 2021; Flaschel et al.,
2026).
    6 Polyconvexity is related to existence theorems in finite elasticity theory, and, strictly speaking, does not apply to

inelastic constitutive models. However, the formal convexity conditions can still be employed for inelastic modeling, e.g.,
by using energy potentials that are polyconvex functions in the sense of Ball.
    7 Parts of the research presented in this manuscript have been published in the first author’s doctoral thesis (Klein, 2025).




                                                               3
symmetry groups, this model fulfills all common mechanical constitutive conditions a priori. (2) We
propose a group symmetrization-based method for the construction of polyconvex invariants for finite
symmetry groups. Based on this, we derive a new integrity basis for a tetragonal symmetry group and
a new functional basis for a cubic symmetry group. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first
polyconvex integrity or functional bases for symmetry groups characterized by structural tensors of order
higher than two. (3) We provide an extensive introduction to the construction of polyconvex integrity
and functional bases, which form the basis of polyconvex invariant-based constitutive models. We discuss
polyconvex bases for triclinic, isotropic, transversely isotropic, monoclinic, rhombic, tetragonal, and cubic
symmetry groups. (4) We benchmark the polyconvex PANN constitutive models with highly nonlinear
homogenization data of cubic metamaterials.
    The outline of the remaining manuscript is as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the fundamentals of
finite elasticity theory. In Section 3, we discuss the theoretical foundations of polyconvex invariant-based
constitutive modeling. Next, in Section 4, we discuss polyconvex PANN modeling approaches based on
invariants constructed via structural tensors, as well as approaches based on triclinic invariants and group
symmetrization. Subsequently, in Section 5, we apply the PANN models to homogenization data of cubic
microstructured materials. This is followed by the conclusion in Section 6. The notation employed in
this work is summarized in Appendix A. In Appendix B, we provide analytical relations between different
invariant bases.


2     Fundamentals of hyperelasticity
In this section, the fundamentals of hyperelasticity are introduced. In Section 2.1, the relevant kinematics
are outlined. The constitutive conditions of hyperelasticity are discussed in Section 2.2.

2.1    Kinematics
Consider a body in its reference configuration B0 ⊂ R3 at the time t0 ∈ R and its current configuration
B ⊂ R3 at the time t ∈ T := {τ ∈ R | τ ≥ t0 }. The mapping ϕ : B0 × T → B links material particles
x0 ∈ B0 to x = ϕ(x0 , t) ∈ B. The particles x0 and x can furthermore be related via the displacement field
u0 (x0 , t) = ϕ(x0 , t) − x0 . Associated with ϕ, the deformation gradient F ∈ GL+ (3), its cofactor
H ∈ GL+ (3), and its determinant J ∈ R+ are defined as (Bonet et al., 2015; Haupt, 2002)
                                                     1                           1
            F = ∇0 ϕ ,      H = cof F = JF −T =        F   F,      J = det F =     F : (F   F).          (1)
                                                     2                           6
The kinematical quantities in Eq. (1) have the following geometrical interpretation (Bonet and Wood,
2008). The deformation gradient F maps infinitesimal line elements dx0 from the reference configuration
to infinitesimal line elements dx from the current configuration via dx = F · dx0 . The cofactor of the
deformation gradient H maps the oriented area element in the reference configuration da0 = n0 da0 to the
corresponding oriented area element in the current configuration da = nda via da = H · da0 . Here, both
n0 and n are unit vectors. The determinant of the deformation gradient J maps infinitesimal volume
elements in the reference configuration dv0 to infinitesimal volume elements in the current configuration
dv via dv = Jdv0 . Using the polar decomposition (Holzapfel, 2000), the deformation gradient and its
cofactor can be expressed as F = R · U and H = R · cof U , respectively, where U ∈ SYM+ (3) is the
right stretch tensor and R ∈ SO(3) is the rotation tensor. Note that the determinant of the deformation
gradient is invariant under rotation since det R ·U = det R det U = det U . As an alternative deformation
measure, we introduce the right Cauchy-Green tensor C = F T · F ∈ SYM+ (3) and its cofactor
G = cof C ∈ SYM+ (3), which are independent of R. Furthermore, scalar invariants as strain measures
are introduced in Section 3.

2.2    Constitutive conditions
In hyperelastic constitutive modeling, we want to find the relation between the deformation at a material
point in a body and the stress it evokes. This can be done by introducing the hyperelastic potential

                                   W : GL+ (3) → R ,        F 7→ W (F ) ,                                (2)

which corresponds to the Helmholtz free energy density of the body (Haupt, 2002; Holzapfel, 2000).
Throughout this work, we assume that every energy potential is sufficiently continuously differentiable.


                                                     4
The first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor is given as the gradient field

                                               P = ∂F W (F ) .                                             (3)

Thus, as a first constitutive condition, thermodynamic consistency in the form of the energy balance
Ẇ − P : Ḟ = 0 is fulfilled a priori. Furthermore, the material behavior should be independent on the
choice of observer, which is formalized as the objectivity condition

                            W (Q · F ) = W (F )      ∀(F , Q) ∈ GL+ (3) × SO(3) .                          (4)

Note that in hyperelasticity, objectivity implies fulfillment of the balance of angular momentum (Silhavy,
2014, Proposition 8.3.2). The material symmetry condition

                              W (F · QT ) = W (F )     ∀(F , Q) ∈ GL+ (3) × G ,                            (5)

takes into account the material’s underlying (an-)isotropy, where G ⊆ O(3) denotes the symmetry group
of the considered material (Riemer et al., 2025). The stress normalization condition

                                               P (F ) F =I = 0 ,                                           (6)

ensures that the stress vanishes in the reference configuration. Finally, the volumetric growth condi-
tion
                                        W (F ) → ∞ as J → 0+ ,                                     (7)
captures the physical consideration that the material body cannot be compressed to a zero volume.
   Further constitutive conditions are grounded in the concept of convexity. From an engineering per-
spective, the most appealing convexity condition is the ellipticity (or rank-one convexity) condition
(Zee and Sternberg, 1983)

                   (a ⊗ b) : ∂F2 F W : (a ⊗ b) ≥ 0      ∀a, b ∈ R3 , F + a ⊗ b ∈ GL+ (3) .                 (8)

Ellipticity ensures material stability (Schröder et al., 2005), meaning a stable and robust behavior when
applying the constitutive model in numerical applications such as the finite element method. From a
physical perspective, ellipticity guarantees the existence of real-valued wave speeds for solutions of the
governing equations of finite elasticity theory (Zee and Sternberg, 1983).
    While ellipticity is a very attractive constitutive condition, it is practically impossible to directly
formulate hyperelastic potentials that are elliptic by construction (Neff et al., 2015). A sufficient condition
for ellipticity is the polyconvexity condition introduced by Ball (1976, 1977), which can be practically
employed in constitutive models (Schröder and Neff, 2003). Polyconvex potentials allow for a (non-unique)
representation of the hyperelastic potential as

                          P : L2 × L2 × R → R ,         (F , H, J) 7→ P(F , H, J) ,                        (9)

with the convex function P and W (F ) = P(F , H, J). Polyconvexity is linked to existence theorems in
finite elasticity theory (Ball, 1976, 1977). When the potential is polyconvex and the coercivity condition
in Eq. (12) is fulfilled with suitable exponents, the existence of minimizers of the underlying variational
functionals in finite elasticity is guaranteed (Ball, 1976, 1977; Müller et al., 1994). The practical rel-
evance of the existence theorems associated with polyconvexity can be questioned from an engineering
perspective. For instance, they regard material behavior that lies outside a practically relevant deforma-
tion range. Besides that, polyconvexity has no immediate physical meaning (Ball, 1977), and polyconvex
constitutive models can produce stress predictions that contradict mathematical considerations for ide-
alized elastic materials (Wollner et al., 2026b). However, polyconvexity has been recognized as the most
straightforward way of ensuring ellipticity by construction (Neff et al., 2015; Schröder et al., 2005).
Furthermore, polyconvexity provides the constitutive model with a pronounced mathematical structure
which can improve its generalization properties (Kalina et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2026a). Overall, this
makes polyconvexity a constitutive condition of practical relevance in constitutive modeling.
Remark 2.1 (Energy normalization and coercivity conditions). An energy normalization condi-
tion similar to Eq. (6) can be formulated as (Holzapfel, 2000)

                                              W (F ) F =I = 0 .                                           (10)


                                                       5
However, in most applications, the gradient of the potential, i.e., the stress, is of interest rather than
the value of the potential itself. Thus, we do not consider Eq. (10) in the following constitutive model
formulation. In cases where the values of the hyperelastic potential are relevant, Eq. (10) can be fulfilled
trivially by a suitable projection term (Linden et al., 2023). While the value of the potential itself is often
not considered, its existence is of fundamental significance. In particular, in hyperelasticity, the relation of
the stress to a potential according to Eq. (3) is equivalent to thermodynamic consistency. Furthermore, for
mathematical convenience and following the standard literature procedure, most constitutive conditions
are formulated in terms of the hyperelastic potential.
    Different coercivity conditions have been postulated for finite elasticity theory. For a coercive function,
f (x) → ∞ as ∥x∥ → ∞ holds. For instance,

                                               W (F ) → ∞          as   J → ∞,                                               (11)

has been applied in addition to the volumetric growth condition Eq. (7) and captures the physical obser-
vation that a body cannot be expanded to an infinite volume (Linden et al., 2023), while
                                                     β       β 
                                      W (F ) ≥ α ∥F ∥ 1 + ∥H∥ 2 + γ ,              α>0                                       (12)

is an important coercivity condition for existence theorems in finite elasticity theory (Ball, 2002; Müller
et al., 1994). However, the practical relevance of coercivity conditions can be questioned, as they regard
material behavior that lies outside a relevant deformation range (Klein et al., 2022a). Thus, we do not
consider coercivity conditions in the following constitutive model formulation. Note that this is in contrast
to the volumetric growth condition (cf. Eq. (7)), which indeed can be relevant for highly compressible
materials (Klein et al., 2022a).


3       Polyconvex invariant-based constitutive modeling
In this section, we discuss polyconvex constitutive modeling based on invariants. For this, the general
formulation and convexity requirements are introduced in Section 3.1. This is followed by a discussion
of anisotropic hyperelasticity based on triclinic invariants and group symmetrization in Section 3.2. We
introduce polyconvex integrity and functional bases for different symmetry groups based on structural
tensors in Section 3.3. In Section 3.4, we discuss the challenge of formulating polyconvex integrity or
functional bases for anisotropic material behavior.

3.1      General formulation
By formulating the hyperelastic potential introduced in Section 2.2 in terms of invariants, material sym-
metry and objectivity can be fulfilled by construction (Holzapfel, 2000).8 In hyperelasticity, eleven crystal
symmetry groups, two transversely isotropic symmetry groups, and one isotropic symmetry group are of
interest. In this work, we only consider the isotropic K (iso), transversely isotropic D∞ (ti), triclinic C1
(tri), monoclinic C 2 (mon), rhombic D2 (rho), tetragonal D4 (tet), and cubic O (cub) groups, which we
abbreviate as indicated in the brackets.9
    Generally, there are two ways of constructing invariants (Riemer et al., 2025). The first approach is
in coordinate-dependent form, where invariants are constructed for a specific choice of reference frame.
The second approach is based on structural tensors and isotropic tensor functions. In line with most
modern works, we mainly adopt the latter approach and provide coordinate-dependent invariants only
for triclinic anisotropy. For structural tensor-based formulations, we denote general invariants that might
be polyconvex or not by Ji□ and polyconvex invariants by Ii□ , where □ ∈ {tri, iso, ti, mon, rho, tet, cub}
denotes the considered symmetry group. For coordinate-dependent formulations, we denote general
invariants by ki and polyconvex invariants by ci .

3.1.1     Structural tensors and isotropic tensor functions
The formulation of invariants for anisotropic materials is commonly based on structural tensors (Q.-S.
Zheng and A. Spencer, 1993). For the symmetry groups considered in this work, second-order structural
    8 For a comprehensive introduction to literature on invariant theory, the reader is referred to (Riemer et al., 2025).
    9 In the numerical examples, we only consider cubic anisotropy.     However, we want to provide polyconvex integrity or
functional bases for as many symmetry groups as possible.




                                                               6
tensors M □ ∈ L2 and fourth-order structural tensors M□ ∈ L4 are sufficient to characterize          the ma-
terial behavior. The tuple of structural tensors S □ = M □
                                                         (1) , . . . M (m) , M(1) , . . . M(n) belongs to the
                                                                       □      □            □
                                                                                              

symmetry group G □ ⊆ O(3) if it satisfies the conditions

           Q ⋆ S □ = S □ ∀ Q ∈ G □ ∧ Q ⋆ S □ ̸= S □ ∀ Q ̸∈ G □             Q ⋆ S □ = S □ =⇒ Q ∈ G □
                                                                               ⇔
  with Q ⋆ S □ = Q ⋆ M □                   □          □                  □
                                                                                                                          (13)
                                                                             
                       (1) , . . . , Q ⋆ M (m) , Q ⋆ M(1) , . . . , Q ⋆ M(n)

  and Q ⋆ M ij = Qia Qjb Mab , (Q ⋆ M)ijkl = Qia Qjb Qkc Qld Mabcd .
              


The isotropicization theorem states that the material symmetry condition (cf. Eq. (5)) for the symmetry
group G can be alternatively expressed as

                   W F , S □ = W F · QT , Q ⋆ S □        ∀(F , Q) ∈ GL+ (3) × O(3) .               (14)
                                                   

This means that by including structural tensors in the arguments of the hyperelastic potential, it can be
expressed as an isotropic tensor function even if the considered material behavior is anisotropic (Haupt,
2002; Itskov, 2015). Representation theorems for scalar-valued tensor functions provide expressions for
invariants of the right Cauchy-Green tensor C and the tuple of structural tensors S □ (Boehler, 1977;
Itskov, 2015; Xiao, 1996). Based on this, different tuples of invariants can be derived. Let I □ :=
(J1□ , . . . , Jm
                □
                  ) ∈ Rm be an m-tuple containing invariants. We call the tuple of invariants an integrity
basis when any invariant of the considered symmetry group can be represented as a polynomial in the
invariants contained in I □ . We call an integrity basis minimal 10 when none of the invariants contained
in I □ can be represented as a polynomial in the other invariants. Further, we call the tuple of invariants
a functional basis when any invariant of the considered symmetry group can be represented as a function
of the invariants contained in I □ . Every integrity basis is a functional basis but not vice versa. For a
comprehensive introduction to these concepts, the reader is referred to Riemer et al. (2025).

3.1.2    Convexity requirements
In invariant-based modeling, the hyperelastic potential does not directly depend on the deformation
gradient F . Instead, the potential is a function of a tuple of invariants, i.e.,11

                                             ψ : Rm → R ,         I □ 7→ ψ(I □ ) ,                                        (15)

with W (F ) = ψ(I □ ). Thus, the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress can be expressed as
                                                                m
                                                                X
                                           P = ∂F W (F ) =           ∂Iα□ ψ dF Iα□ ,                                      (16)
                                                               α=1

where the derivatives of the potential w.r.t. the invariants are referred to as stress coefficients, while the
derivatives of the invariants w.r.t. the deformation gradient are referred to as tensor generators (Kalina
et al., 2022).
    Next, we study polyconvexity of invariant-based potentials. Let ξ := (F , H, J) ∈ R19 be the argu-
ments of the polyconvexity condition, cf. Eq. (9). Polyconvexity of the potential in Eq. (15) is equivalent
to the positive semi-definiteness (p.s.d.) of the Hessian
                                              T                    
                  d2ξξ ψ(I □ ) = [Hψ ] = ∂ξ I □ · ∂I2 □ I □ ψ · ∂ξ I □ + ∂I □ ψ · ∂ξξ
                                                                                   2
                                                                                      I□ ⪰ 0 .                            (17)
                                        |            {z               }  |      {z     }
                                                 constitutive type term              geometric type term


Since, in general, the invariants contained in I □ are nonlinear functions of F , H, and J, the Hessian
operator [Hψ ] consists of two terms. The first term includes second derivatives of the potential w.r.t.
the invariants, which suggests to phrase it as a “constitutive type term”. The second term includes
first derivatives of the potential w.r.t. the invariants, which suggests to phrase it as a “geometric type
term” (Poya et al., 2025). When considering p.s.d. of Eq. (17), in theory, negative eigenvalues of the
constitutive type term can be compensated by positive eigenvalues of the geometric type term and vice
  10 Traditionally, the mechanics community employed the terminology “irreducible” instead of “minimal”, see e.g. (Ebbing,

2010; Linden et al., 2023). However, from the mathematical theory of invariants, “minimal” is the correct terminology.
  11 Strictly speaking, ψ also depends on the considered set of structural tensors S □ , i.e., ψ = ψ(I □ , S □ ), which we omit

for brevity.


                                                              7
versa, resulting in an overall p.s.d. Hessian operator [Hψ ] (Klein et al., 2026a). In constitutive modeling
practice, however, it is infeasible to allow for negative eigenvalues in one of the two terms and still ensure
by construction that [Hψ ] is p.s.d. for all deformation scenarios. Rather, p.s.d. of both the constitutive
type term and the geometric type term individually is applied (Klein et al., 2022a; Schröder and Neff,
2003), which is a sufficient but not necessary condition for [Hψ ] to be p.s.d. In particular, we employ the
following conditions:
    • When the potential ψ is convex in the invariants I □ , the constitutive type term in Eq. (17) is p.s.d.
      (Horn and Johnson, 2013, Observation 7.1.8).
    • When the potential ψ is monotonic12 in the invariants I □ and all invariants contained in I □ are
      polyconvex, the geometric type term in Eq. (17) is p.s.d.
We call an invariant polyconvex if it fulfills the polyconvexity condition (cf. Eq. (9)). For instance,
                                    2
the isotropic invariant J1iso = ∥F ∥ is convex in F and thus polyconvex. However, not all invariants
are polyconvex, e.g., the transversely isotropic invariant J2ti = tr C 2 · M ti is not elliptic and thus not
polyconvex (Merodio and Neff, 2006). For unrestricted, non-polyconvex models, also non-polyconvex
invariants can be applied, and the potential ψ is not subject to convexity or monotonicity constraints.
   When constructing invariant tuples based on representation theorems (cf. Section 3.1.1), the poly-
convexity condition is not considered, and the obtained invariants are generally not polyconvex. Thus,
the integrity bases obtained from representation theorems have to be adapted to obtain polyconvex in-
tegrity or functional bases applicable for polyconvex constitutive modeling. In the following, we adopt
the following scheme to construct polyconvex bases for different symmetry groups:
 (A) Find the (generally non-polyconvex) minimal integrity basis for the considered symmetry group.
     Minimal integrity bases constructed via structural tensors for all commonly considered symmetry
     groups are given in Riemer et al. (2025).13
 (B) Try to formulate a polyconvex integrity or functional basis. For this, a polyconvex represen-
     tation must be found for all of the invariants obtained in (A). To anticipate Section 3.4, formulating
     polyconvex bases remains an open challenge for most anisotropies.
 (C) If required, extend the polyconvex integrity or functional basis. This can either facilitate
     the formulation of polyconvex constitutive models, or it can improve the model’s flexibility.
In Section 3.2, we discuss triclinic integrity bases in coordinate-dependent form, followed by integrity and
functional bases based on structural tensors for a variety of symmetry groups in Section 3.3.
Remark 3.1. For all common symmetry groups, (generally non-polyconvex) integrity and in turn func-
tional bases are available. For polyconvexity, however, it may not always be possible to formulate integrity
bases. The additional flexibility provided by functional bases, i.e., that they admit functional relationships
beyond polynomials, can then become necessary, cf. Appendix B.6. In practical constitutive modeling,
however, the distinction between the two is often of small relevance, as the constitutive model equations
are not restricted to polynomials.

3.2     Anisotropic hyperelasticity based on triclinic invariants and group sym-
        metrization
We now provide integrity bases for triclinic anisotropy in coordinate-dependent form. Together with
group symmetrization, this provides a constitutive modeling framework for finite symmetry groups.

3.2.1    Coordinate-dependent triclinic invariants
(A) Minimal integrity basis            The coordinate-dependent invariants
           k1 = C11 ,        k2 = C22 ,       k3 = C33 ,        k4 = C12 ,       k5 = C13 ,       k6 = C23 ,         (18)
proposed by (Smith, 1962) form an minimal integrity basis for the triclinic C1 group. The triclinic group
is the most general material symmetry group, as reflected by the fact that Eq. (18) contains all six
independent coordinates of the right Cauchy-Green tensor. Thus, with triclinic anisotropy, arbitrary
(an-)isotropic material behavior can be represented.
  12 In this work, if not stated otherwise, “monotonic” refers to component-wise monotonically increasing functions, i.e.,

∂xi f (x) ≥ 0.
  13 Note that corresponding integrity bases can also be formulated using coordinate-based invariants (Smith, 1962).




                                                            8
(B) Polyconvex integrity basis Not all coordinates of C are polyconvex. In particular, while the
main diagonal components of C are polyconvex, the remaining components are not elliptic and thus
not polyconvex. The difference between main and off-diagonal elements of C becomes evident for the
examples
                        C : (e(1) ⊗ e(1) ) = C11 = F11
                                                    2     2
                                                       + F21    2
                                                             + F31 ,
                              (1)    (2)
                                                                                              (19)
                        C : (e ⊗ e ) = C12 = F11 F12 + F21 F22 + F31 F32 ,
where e(i) ∈ R3 denote the basis vectors of the employed Cartesian coordinate system. The component
C11 is convex in the deformation gradient F . In contrast to that, C12 is not elliptic and thus not
polyconvex, which can be shown by evaluating the ellipticity condition (cf. Eq. (8)) for, e.g., [a] =
(0, 0, 1)T , [b] = (1, −1, 0)T . The difference is that C11 only contains square functions of individual Fij ,
which is a convex operation, whereas C12 contains multiplicative terms of different Fij , which generally
does not preserve convexity (Schröder and Neff, 2003). Thus, the triclinic integrity basis in Eq. (18) is
not polyconvex. To construct a polyconvex triclinic integrity basis, we consider the polyconvex projection
                     C : A(i) ∈ R     with A(i) = u(i) ⊗ u(i)       for     u(i) ∈ R3 u(i) = 1 .                   (20)
By inserting the vectors
                                                        √                  √                  √
                    e(1) , e(2) , e(3) , (e(1) + e(2) )/ 2, (e(1) + e(3) )/ 2, (e(2) + e(3) )/ 2 ,                 (21)
into Eq. (20), we construct the coordinate-dependent invariants
                 c1 = C11 ,       c2 = C22 ,       c3 = C33 ,         c4 = (C11 + C22 + 2C12 )/2 ,
                                                                                                                   (22)
                 c5 = (C11 + C33 + 2C13 )/2 ,                         c6 = (C22 + C33 + 2C23 )/2 ,
which form a polyconvex integrity basis for the triclinic C1 group, as it is possible to express k1−6 as
polynomials in c1−6 . The relation between both is linear, and we leave the calculations to the interested
reader.

(C) Extension of the polyconvex integrity basis In a polyconvex modeling framework, it seems
very natural to also consider the coordinates of the cofactor of the right Cauchy-Green tensor G and the
determinant of the deformation gradient J. This is motivated by the fact that J and the coordinates of
G are not convex functions of C, and therefore cannot be represented within a convex formulation based
solely on C. Thus, including G and J can improve the flexibility of the constitutive model. Similar
to Eq. (22), we construct the coordinate-dependent invariants of G
                c7 = G11 ,       c8 = G22 ,        c9 = G33 ,        c10 = (G11 + G22 + 2G12 )/2 ,
                                                                                                                   (23)
                c11 = (G11 + G33 + 2G13 )/2 ,                        c12 = (G22 + G33 + 2G23 )/2 ,
where polyconvexity can be shown by replacing C with G in Eq. (20). Moreover, we consider
                                               c13 = J ,       c14 = −J .                                          (24)
Including both J and −J is motivated as follows. Invariants such as C11 are nonlinear functions of the
arguments of the polyconvexity condition, in particular, det C = J 2 is a nonlinear function in J. Thus, the
Hessian operator of the invariant-based potential consists of both a constitutive type term and a geometric
type term (cf. Eq. (17)), and the potential has to be both convex and monotonically increasing in such
invariants to preserve their polyconvexity. In contrast to that, J is the only invariant quantity directly
included in the polyconvexity condition (cf. Section 2.1). Being linear in ξ, the constitutive type term
vanishes for J (cf. Eq. (17)). Thus, the potential ψ must not necessarily be monotonically increasing
in this invariant. This is pragmatically taken into account by adding −J in the set of arguments for
polyconvex models, which allows to formulate potentials which are convex and monotonically increasing
in all of their arguments without being overly restrictive in J.14 Overall, this simplifies the formulation
of polyconvex NN constitutive models, as it enables to express the potential as a convex and monotonic
function in all of the invariants (cf. Section 4.2.2). We consider coordinate-dependent triclinic invariants
only for polyconvex constitutive models, for which we employ the invariants15
                     ĉ = c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 , c5 , c6 , c7 , c8 , c9 , c10 , c11 , c12 , c13 , c14 ∈ R14 . (25)
                                                                                                  

 14 It would also be possible to use an adapted NN architecture that is convex in J      and convex and monotonic in the
remaining invariants (Jadoon et al., 2026; Kalina et al., 2026).
  15 For the modeling approach introduced in Section 3.2.1, we deviate from the notation employed in Section 3.1.2. In

particular, we denote the coordinate-dependent integrity basis in Eq. (25) by ĉ instead of I tri .


                                                           9
The elements of the tuple ĉ form an integrity basis, but it is not minimal. However, since the amount
of invariants remains moderate even if some additional invariants are added to the minimal set, non-
minimality poses no problem for the constitutive modeling framework applied in this work.

3.2.2    Group symmetrization
As discussed in Section 3.2.1, the hyperelastic potential

                                              ψ : R14 → R ,       ĉ 7→ ψ(ĉ) ,                                         (26)

with W (F ) = ψ(ĉ) based on the triclinic integrity basis ĉ (cf. Eq. (25)) can represent material behavior
for arbitrary symmetry groups, making it a very general approach.16 In recent literature, this is some-
times referred to as coordinate-based modeling (Klein, 2025). This is motivated by the non-polyconvex
triclinic integrity basis in Eq. (18), which so far has been used for these models and includes all six
independent coordinates of the right Cauchy-Green tensor. Notably, this terminology is not motivated
by the formulation of invariants in coordinate-dependent form, cf. (Riemer et al., 2025; Smith, 1962).
The latter would also be possible for other symmetry groups, e.g., transverse isotropy (Schröder, 2010,
Sec. 2.2) or the eleven groups arising from the crystal systems (Smith, 1962).
    For finite symmetry groups G ⊂ O(3), the group symmetrization
                                                    1 X
                                                                                                                        (27)
                                                                   
                                            ψ(C)
                                            e    =      ψ ĉ(Q ⋆ C) ,
                                                   |G|
                                                          Q∈G


provides a potential ψe that fulfills the material symmetry condition Eq. (5) a priori. In invariant theory,
this concept is referred to as Reynolds operator (Derksen and Kemper, 2015, Section 3.1.2), and it has
already been employed in PANN constitutive modeling by (Fernández et al., 2021; Klein et al., 2022a).
    In Eq. (27), |G| is the number of elements in the symmetry group. For infinite symmetry groups
such as transverse isotropy, to approximately fulfill the material symmetry condition, a finite subgroup
of the infinite group may be employed for the group symmetrization (Fernández et al., 2021; Klein et al.,
2022a). As discussed in Klein et al. (2022a, Section 3.2), the group symmetrization operation preserves
the polyconvexity of ψ. For the group symmetrization, multiple evaluations of ψ are required, leading to
an increased computational cost. This can partly be mitigated, as it is sufficient to consider G ⊆ SO(3)
instead of G ⊆ O(3) for the evaluation of Eq. (27). This is because the invariants collected in ĉ are
functions of C, and for potentials expressed in C, a rotation Q and the corresponding rotoinversion −Q
have the same effect, see e.g. Ebbing (2010, Section 3.7) or Riemer et al. (2025, Section 2.3).

3.3     Structural tensor-based polyconvex integrity and functional bases for
        various symmetry groups
In the past, a variety of polyconvex invariants and integrity bases have been proposed for various symmetry
groups, which we summarize in Table 1. To the best of our knowledge, polyconvex invariants have only
been proposed for 10 out of the 14 commonly considered symmetry groups. Notably, the transversely
isotropic C∞ group and the hexagonal C6 and D6 groups are subgroups of the transversely isotropic D∞
group (Q.-S. Zheng and A. Spencer, 1993). Thus, they can be partly characterized by the latter (Schröder
et al., 2008). However, the resulting tuples of invariants remain invariant under a larger set of rotations
than those admissible for the respective symmetry groups, i.e., the tuples of employed structural tensors
do not satisfy the second condition in Eq. (13). Thus, polyconvex invariants that exactly represent these
groups are not available. Polyconvex integrity bases have been proposed only for the following symmetry
groups, all of which can be fully characterized by structural tensors of up to order two (Riemer et al.,
2025): the isotropic K, transversely isotropic D∞ , triclinic C1 , monoclinic C2 , and rhombic D2 groups. In
particular, we are not aware of polyconvex integrity bases for symmetry groups that require structural
tensors of order higher than two, such as the tetragonal D4 or the cubic O group, which both require
structural tensors of third or fourth order (Riemer et al., 2025; Xiao, 1996; Q.-S. Zheng and A. Spencer,
1993).
    In the following, we recall the polyconvex integrity bases available in the literature, and moreover
propose a new polyconvex integrity bases for the tetragonal D4 group and a new functional basis for the
  16 This can be beneficial in scenarios where no information about the material symmetry of the considered material is

available, as the constitutive model can learn the material symmetry behavior through the calibration data. Note that several
methods have been proposed to identify the unknown symmetry group of a material, e.g., a special PANN architecture (Fuhg
et al., 2022; Kalina et al., 2025; Linka et al., 2020) and a projection approach (Ellmer et al., 2026).


                                                             10
Table 1: Availability of polyconvex invariants and integrity or functional bases for the most relevant symmetry
groups in hyperelasticity. For the K, D∞ , C1 , C2 , D2 , and D4 groups, integrity bases are available, while for the
O group, only a functional basis is available.


        Symmetry group with                 Polyconvex invariants                Polyconvex integrity
        Schoenflies notation                                                     or functional basis

        isotropic              K            Ball (1976)                          Ball (1976)

        transverse isotropy    C∞           n/a                                  n/a
                               D∞           Schröder and Neff (2003)             Schröder and Neff (2003)

        triclinic              C1           Schröder et al. (2008)               Schröder et al. (2008)

        monoclinic             C2           Schröder et al. (2008)               Schröder et al. (2008)

        rhombic                D2           Schröder and Neff (2003)             Schröder and Neff (2003)

        tetragonal             C4           Schröder et al. (2010)               n/a
                               D4           Schröder et al. (2010)               our manuscript, Section 3.3.6

        trigonal               C3           Schröder et al. (2010)               n/a
                               D3           Schröder et al. (2010)               n/a

        hexagonal              C6           n/a                                  n/a
                               D6           n/a                                  n/a

        cubic                  T            n/a                                  n/a
                               O            Kambouchev et al. (2007)             our manuscript, Section 3.3.7


cubic O group. Thereby, we denote the preferred direction(s) of a material in the reference configuration
by orthonormal vectors
                                (i)                     (i)   (j)
                              n0 ∈ R3        with     n0 · n0 = δij .                                (28)
If the material has only a single preferred direction, the superscript (i) is omitted. In Appendix B,
we provide the functional relations between the invariant bases introduced in the following. By this,
we verify that the polyconvex invariants belong to the considered symmetry group, and we investigate
whether they form an integrity or a functional basis.

3.3.1     Isotropic material behavior
(A) Minimal integrity basis For the isotropic symmetry group K, no structural tensors are required,
i.e., S iso = ∅.17 The three invariants

                                J1iso = tr C ,      J2iso = tr C 2 ,       J3iso = tr C 3 ,                      (29)

form a minimal integrity basis for the isotropic K group.

(B) Polyconvex integrity basis While the invariants in Eq. (29) are polyconvex (Schröder and Neff,
2003, Sec. 3.2.1), the isotropic polyconvex invariants
                                        2                              2
                     I1iso = tr C = ∥F ∥ ,        I2iso = tr G = ∥H∥ ,           I3iso = det C = J 2 ,           (30)

are a more popular choice in constitutive modeling. The invariants in Eq. (30) form a polyconvex integrity
basis for the isotropic K group as I1−3
                                     iso
                                         can represent J1−3
                                                        iso
                                                            as polynomials, cf. Itskov (2015, Eq. (4.29)),
Schröder and Neff (2003, Eq. (3.18)), and App. B.1. A polyconvex integrity basis for the isotropic K
group was first proposed by Ball (1976, Sec. 8).
 17 Note that the identity tensor I could be employed as structural tensor for isotropic material behavior.




                                                           11
(C) Extension   of the polyconvex integrity basis Instead of I3iso , it can be convenient to employ
J = I3 for NN-based constitutive modeling and furthermore include I4iso = −J, which we already
     p
        iso

motivated below Eq. (24).

3.3.2    Transversely isotropic material behavior
Two transversely isotropic symmetry groups are relevant in anisotropic hyperelasticity (Riemer et al.,
2025). In this work, we only consider the transversely isotropic D∞ group.

(A) Minimal integrity basis For the transversely isotropic symmetry group D∞ , a single second-
order structural tensor is sufficient to characterize the materials anisotropy, e.g.,

                                 S ti = M ti       with    M ti = n0 ⊗ n0 .                (31)
                                             


Together with the isotropic invariants J1−3
                                        iso
                                            introduced in Section 3.3.1, the invariants

                                            J1ti = tr C · M ti ,                J2ti = tr C 2 · M ti ,                                       (32)

form an minimal integrity basis for the transversely isotropic D∞ group.

(B) Polyconvex integrity basis While J1ti is already a polyconvex invariant, J2ti is not elliptic and thus
not polyconvex (Merodio and Neff, 2006). This demonstrates that invariants obtained from representation
theorems, which are based on powers of C, quickly lead to non-polyconvex formulations. To obtain a
polyconvex invariant that includes the information of J2ti , the Cayley-Hamilton theorem (Holzapfel, 2000;
Itskov, 2015) can be employed:
                                        G = C 2 − I1iso C + I2iso I .                                 (33)
Notably, the cofactor G = cof C is a quadratic expression in C. Furthermore, the cofactor of the
deformation gradient H is included in the arguments of the polyconvexity condition, and H is closely
related to G via G = H T · H. Based on this observation, a variety of polyconvex invariants can be
formulated for anisotropic material behavior (Schröder and Neff, 2003). For transverse isotropy, the two
polyconvex invariants
                                                                   2                                                       2
                       I1ti = tr C · M ti = F · M ti                   ,        I2ti = tr G · M ti = G · M ti                  ,             (34)

can be constructed (Schröder and Neff, 2003).18 Together with the isotropic invariants I1−3   iso
                                                                                                  introduced
in Section 3.3.1, the invariants in Eq. (34) form a polyconvex integrity basis for the transversely isotropic
D∞ group. This is because I1,2ti
                                 and I1−3
                                       iso
                                           can represent J1−3
                                                          iso
                                                              and J1,2
                                                                   ti
                                                                       as polynomials, cf. Schröder and Neff
(2003, Eq. (3.46)), App. B.1, and App. B.2. A polyconvex integrity basis for the transversely isotropic
D∞ group was first proposed by Schröder and Neff (2003, Sec. 3.2.2).

(C) Extension of the polyconvex integrity basis                                     As proposed by Schröder and Neff (2003), the
additional polyconvex invariants

                                                I3ti = I1iso − I1ti ,           I4ti = I2iso − I2ti ,                                        (35)

can be constructed. The use of the additional invariants I3ti and I4ti can diminish the restrictions that
polyconvexity poses on the energy potential. In particular, a sufficient condition for polyconvexity is
that the potential is convex and monotonic in polyconvex invariants, cf. Section 3.1.2. However, as
the polyconvex invariants in Eq. (35) demonstrate, the monotonicity condition is not necessary. E.g.,
considering the potential ψ(I1ti , I3ti ), its total derivative w.r.t. I1ti yields

         dI1ti ψ(I1ti , I3ti ) = ∂I1ti ψ(I1ti , I3ti ) + ∂I3ti ψ(I1ti , I3ti )dI1ti I3ti = ∂I1ti ψ(I1ti , I3ti ) − ∂I3ti ψ(I1ti , I3ti ) ,   (36)

which demonstrates that including the additional invariant I3ti allows for decreasing potentials in I1ti
whenever the condition
                                  ∂I1ti ψ(I1ti , I3ti ) < ∂I3ti ψ(I1ti , I3ti ) ,                  (37)
  18 Formulating invariants in terms of the arguments of polyconvexity also provides a geometric interpretation of such

invariants (Schröder and Neff, 2003, Sec. 3.2.2) (cf. Section 2.1).



                                                                           12
holds. In particular, Eq. (37) can be fulfilled even if the potential is convex and monotonic in all invariants.
Thus, using these additional invariants, at least in parts, allow for decreasing functional relationships of
the potential ψ in I1ti and I2ti , thus providing the constitutive model with more flexibility. Note that these
additional invariants are not required when non-polyconvex models are considered, since, in this case,
the potential is not subject to convexity or monotonicity conditions.
Remark 3.2. The invariants in Eq. (35) can be expressed as

                                 tr A − tr A · (n0 ⊗ n0 ) = tr A · (I − n0 ⊗ n0 ) ,                                      (38)

where A represents either C or G. Then, polyconvexity of those invariants immediately follows from the
observation that I − n0 ⊗ n0 is p.s.d. (Schröder and Neff, 2003, Lemma A.12).

3.3.3    Triclinic material behavior
A tuple of structural tensors for the triclinic group C1 can be constructed through six second-order
structural tensors given by M tri
                              (i) = u
                                      (i)
                                          ⊗ u(i) (cf. Eq. (20)). The six u(i) are chosen by replacing e(i)
        (i)                                                         (i)                              (i)    (j)
with n0 in Eq. (21). In this case, the choice of n0 is generic given that n0 · n0 = δij . Then,
  (1−3)
n0      span the R3 , and the tuple of structural tensors characterizes the triclinic group. The polyconvex
integrity basis and its extension for triclinic anisotropy can then be obtained as discussed in Section 3.2.1.
A polyconvex integrity basis for the triclinic symmetry group C1 was first proposed by Schröder et al.
(2008, Sec. 3.2).

3.3.4    Monoclinic material behavior
(A) Minimal integrity basis                The monoclinic symmetry group C2 can be characterized with the two
second-order structural tensors
                                                                               (1)     (1)     (2)         (2)
                                                                    M mon
                                                                      (1) = n0 ⊗ n0 − n0 ⊗ n0 ,
                    mon
                              M mon     mon
                                                        with                                                             (39)
                                                  
                S         =     (1) , M (2)                                    (1)     (2)     (2)         (1)
                                                                    M mon
                                                                      (2) = n0 ⊗ n0 − n0 ⊗ n0 .


Together with the isotropic invariants J1,2
                                        iso
                                            introduced in Section 3.3.1, the invariants
                                  2
          J1mon = tr C · M mon
                           (2)         ,         J2mon = tr C · M mon
                                                                  (1) ,        J3mon = tr C · M mon     mon
                                                                                                (1) · M (2) ,
                                                                                                                         (40)
                                                 J4mon = tr C 2 · M mon
                                                                    (1) ,      J5mon = tr C 2 · M mon     mon
                                                                                                  (1) · M (2) ,

form an minimal integrity basis for the monoclinic C2 group.

(B) Polyconvex integrity basis The monoclinic structural tensors in Eq. (39) are not p.s.d. and thus
not suitable for the construction of polyconvex invariants. Instead, in the following, we consider

                                                               f mon =n(1) ⊗ n(1) ,
                                                               M (1)   0      0

              Semon = M
                      f mon , M
                              f mon                   with     f mon = n(1) + n(2) ⊗ n(1) + n(2)                         (41)
                                                                                               
                        (1)     (2)                            M (2)    0      0      0      0
                                                                                 (1)     (1)     (2)         (2) 
                                                                            + 2 n0 ⊗ n0 + n0 ⊗ n0                    ,

which is an alternative tuple of p.s.d. stuctural tensors for monoclinic anisotropy (Olive et al., 2022), see
also (Kalina et al., 2025, Sec. A.3). This shows that, for some symmetry groups, identifying a suitable
tuple of p.s.d. structural tensors is a first step towards the construction of a polyconvex integrity basis.
Together with the isotropic invariants I1−3iso
                                               , the invariants

               I1mon = tr C · M
                              f mon ,              I2mon = tr C · M
                                                                  f mon ,                      f mon 2 ,
                                                                                I3mon = tr C · M
                                                                                                     
                                (1)                                 (2)                          (2)
                                                                                                                         (42)
                                                   I4mon = tr G · M
                                                                  f mon ,
                                                                    (1)         I5mon = tr G · M
                                                                                               f mon ,
                                                                                                 (2)


form a polyconvex integrity basis for the monoclinic C2 group. This is because I1−5
                                                                                mon
                                                                                    and I1,2
                                                                                         iso
                                                                                             can represent
J1,2 and J1−5 as polynomials, cf. App. B.1 and App. B.2. A polyconvex integrity basis for the monoclinic
  iso     mon

C2 group was first proposed by Schröder et al. (2008, Sec. 3.2).



                                                               13
(C) Extension of the polyconvex integrity basis Similar to Eq. (35), additional polyconvex in-
variants could be constructed based on the structural tensor M
                                                             f mon , cf. Remark 3.2.
                                                               (1)


3.3.5   Rhombic material behavior
(A) Minimal integrity basis For the rhombic symmetry group D2 , a single second-order structural
tensor is sufficient to characterize the materials anisotropy, e.g.,
                                                                         (1)     (1)      (2)         (2)
                     S rho = M rho             with        M rho = n0 ⊗ n0 − n0 ⊗ n0 .                               (43)
                                        


Together with the isotropic invariants J1−3
                                        iso
                                            introduced in Section 3.3.1, the invariants
                                                                                          2
                            J1rho = tr C · M rho ,               J2rho = tr C · M rho         ,
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                     (44)
                            J3rho = tr C 2 · M rho ,             J4rho = tr C 2 · M     rho
                                                                                            
                                                                                                  ,

form an minimal integrity basis for the rhombic D2 group.

(B) Polyconvex integrity basis The rhombic structural tensor in Eq. (43) is not p.s.d. and thus not
suitable for the construction of polyconvex invariants. Instead, in the following, we consider

                                                                         f rho =n(1) ⊗ n(1) ,
                                                                         M 1     0      0
                         Serho = M
                                 f rho , M
                                         f rho              with                                                     (45)
                                                      
                                   1       2
                                                                         f rho =n(2) ⊗ n(2) ,
                                                                         M 2     0      0

which is an alternative tuple of p.s.d. structural tensors for rhombic anisotropy (Kalina et al., 2025,
Sec. A.4). Together with the isotropic invariants I1−3
                                                   iso
                                                       , the invariants

                               I1rho = tr C · M
                                              f rho ,
                                                1                 I2rho = tr C · M
                                                                                 f rho ,
                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                     (46)
                               I3rho = tr G · M
                                              f rho ,
                                                1                 I4rho = tr G · M
                                                                                 f rho ,
                                                                                   2

form a polyconvex integrity basis for the rhombic D2 group. This is because I1−4
                                                                              rho
                                                                                  and I1−3
                                                                                       iso
                                                                                           can represent
J1−4 and J1−3 as polynomials, cf. Schröder and Neff (2003, Sec. 5), App. B.1 and App. B.4. A polyconvex
  rho      iso

integrity basis for the rhombic D2 group was first proposed by Schröder and Neff (2003, Sec. 5).

(C) Extension of the polyconvex integrity basis Similar to Eq. (35), additional polyconvex in-
variants could be constructed based on the structural tensor M
                                                             f rho and M
                                                               1
                                                                       f rho (Schröder and Neff, 2003,
                                                                         2
Sec. 5), cf. Remark 3.2.

3.3.6   Tetragonal material behavior
Two tetragonal symmetry groups are relevant in anisotropic hyperelasticity (Riemer et al., 2025). In this
work, we only consider the tetragonal D4 group.

(A) Minimal integrity basis For the tetragonal symmetry group D4 , a single fourth-order structural
tensor is sufficient to characterize the material’s anisotropy, e.g.,
                                                                   2
                                                                          (i)     (i)      (i)        (i)
                                                                   X
                     S tet = Mtet             with        Mtet =                                                     (47)
                                    
                                                                         n0 ⊗ n0 ⊗ n0 ⊗ n0 .
                                                                   i=1

Together with the isotropic invariants J1−3
                                        iso
                                            introduced in Section 3.3.1, the invariants
                                                                   2
              J1tet = tr Mtet : C           J2tet = tr Mtet : C              ,   J3tet = tr Mtet : C 2 ,
                                                                                                            2       (48)
                                            J4tet = tr C 2 · Mtet : C ,          J5tet = tr Mtet : C 2
                                                                         
                                                                                                                 ,

form an minimal integrity basis for the tetragonal D4 group.




                                                            14
(B) Polyconvex integrity basis Polyconvex invariants for the tetragonal symmetry group D4 were
first proposed by Schröder et al. (2010, Sec. 3). However, therein, no integrity or functional basis is
provided. We now propose a new polyconvex integrity basis for the tetragonal D4 group. To achieve this,
we make use of a new method for invariant construction that is not based on the classical procedure to
construct invariants via structural tensors and isotropic extensions, but rather on a group symmetrization
approach (cf. Section 3.2.2):
Theorem 3.1 (Polyconvex tetragonal invariant function based on group symmetrization).
The function
          2   h            ib1     h           ib2 c
                 (i)  (i)             (i)  (i)
        X
    f=       a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : C     + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : G       with a1 , a2 ≥ 0, b1 , b2 , c ≥ 1 , (49)
            i=1

is a polyconvex invariant of the tetragonal symmetry group D4 .
Proof. Let us consider the polyconvex function
                              h               ib1     h           ib2 c
                                   (1)    (1)            (1)  (1)
                       f˜ = 2 a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : C       + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : G       .                                                   (50)

Application of the group symmetrization for the tetragonal D4 group on f˜ yields

          1 X
                    h                           ib1     h                         ib2 c
                         (1)   (1)              T             (1)  (1)              T
     f=          2 a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : Q · C · Q              + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : Q · G · Q
          8
            Q∈D4

          1 X
                    h                            ib1      h                           ib2 c
                              (1)          (1)                       (1)         (1)
       =         2 a1 QT · n0 ⊗ QT · n0          :C     + a 2 QT · n 0 ⊗ Q T · n 0     :G                                     (51)
          8
               Q∈D4
            2   h            ib1     h           ib2 c
                   (i)  (i)             (i)  (i)
            X
        =      a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : C     + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : G       .
            i=1

                                                                      (1)
In Eq. (51), the last equality follows by evaluating QT ·n0 for the 8 elements of the tetragonal symmetry
group (A. J. M. Spencer, 1971, Table 1). Since this symmetry group has a finite number of elements,
application of the group symmetrization ensures exact fulfillment of the material symmetry condition.
Furthermore, the group symmetrization operation preserves the polyconvexity of the function, cf. (Klein
et al., 2022a, Section 3.2). Thus, the function f in Eq. (49) is a polyconvex invariant of the tetragonal
D4 group .

Corollary 3.1 (Polyconvex tetragonal invariants based on group symmetrization). Based
on Theorem 3.1, we construct the polyconvex invariants19
               2                                  2 h                       i2                         2
                      (i)   (i)                           (i)        (i)                                      (i)     (i)
               X                                  X                                                    X
     I1tet =         n0 ⊗ n0 : C ,      I2tet =          n0 ⊗ n0 : C             ,           I3tet =         n0 ⊗ n0 : G ,
               i=1                                i=1                                                  i=1
                                                                                                                              (52)
               2 h              i2                      2 h                         i       h                      i2
                      (i)  (i)                                   (i)  (i)                         (i)  (i)
               X                                        X
     I4tet =         n0 ⊗ n0 : G ,          I5tet =             n0 ⊗ n0 : C              +       n0 ⊗ n0 : G              .
               i=1                                      i=1

The invariants I1−5
                  tet
                        and I1−3
                             iso
                                    form an integrity basis for the tetragonal D4 group. This is because
I1−5 and I1,2 can represent J1,2
 tet       iso                   iso
                                     and J1−5
                                           tet
                                               as polynomials, cf. App. B.1 and App. B.5. Furthermore, the
representation of I1−5 in terms of J1−5 in App. B.5 verifies that the former are invariants of the tetragonal
                    tet                tet

D4 group.

(C) Extension of the polyconvex integrity basis Based on Eq. (49), additional polyconvex tetrag-
onal invariants could be constructed that might improve the flexibility of the constitutive model. More-
over, Eq. (49) could be employed as part of the constitutive model with trainable material parameters
{a1 , a2 , b1 , b2 , c}.
  19 We would like to point out that the polyconvex bases determined by group symmetrization, unlike the integrity bases

known from the literature, contain some inhomogeneous polynomials.




                                                                15
3.3.7     Cubic material behavior
Two cubic symmetry groups are relevant in anisotropic hyperelasticity (Riemer et al., 2025). In this work,
we only consider the cubic O group.

(A) Minimal integrity basis For the cubic symmetry group O, a single fourth-order structural tensor
is sufficient to characterize the material’s anisotropy, e.g.,
                                                                      3
                                                                                (i)    (i)   (i)    (i)
                                                                      X
                        S cub = Mcub           with      Mcub =                                                     (53)
                                           
                                                                            n0 ⊗ n0 ⊗ n0 ⊗ n0 .
                                                                      i=1

Together with the isotropic invariants J1−3
                                        iso
                                            introduced in Section 3.3.1, the invariants
                              2                                 3
        J1cub = tr Mcub : C                J2cub = tr Mcub : C                        J3cub = tr C 2 · Mcub : C ,
                                                                                                               
                                   ,                                  ,
                                2                                        2                                   2   (54)
        J4cub = tr Mcub : C 2          ,   J5cub = tr C 2 · Mcub : C            ,     J6cub = tr C · Mcub : C 2 ,

form an minimal integrity basis for the cubic O group.

(B) Polyconvex functional basis Polyconvex invariants for the cubic symmetry group O were first
proposed by Kambouchev et al. (2007, Sec. 3). However, therein, no integrity or functional basis is
provided. We now propose a new polyconvex functional basis for the cubic O group. To achieve this, we
make again use of the new method for invariant construction that is based on the group symmetrization
approach (cf. Section 3.2.2):
Theorem 3.2 (Polyconvex cubic invariant function based on group symmetrization). The
function
         3    h            ib1     h           i b2  c
                 (i)  (i)             (i)  (i)
         X
     f=      a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : C     + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : G         with a1 , a2 ≥ 0, b1 , b2 , c ≥ 1 , (55)
           i=1

is a polyconvex invariant of the cubic symmetry group O.
Proof. Let us consider the polyconvex function
                              h               ib1     h           ib2 c
                        ˜          (1)    (1)            (1)  (1)
                       f = 3 a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : C        + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : G       .                                         (56)

Application of the group symmetrization for the cubic O group on f˜ provides

           1 X
                    h                          ib1      h                     ib2 c
                          (1)  (1)                            (1)   (1)
    f=           3 a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : Q · C · QT            + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : Q · G · QT
          24
             Q∈O

           1 X
                    h                            ib1      h                       ib2 c
                            T (1)     T    (1)                    T  (1)   T (1)
       =         3 a1 Q · n0 ⊗ Q · n0            :C     + a 2 Q · n0 ⊗ Q · n0      :G                               (57)
          24
                  Q∈O
           3   h            i b1     h           ib2 c
                  (i)  (i)              (i)  (i)
           X
         =    a1 n0 ⊗ n0 : C      + a2 n0 ⊗ n0 : G       .
            i=1

                                                                          (1)
In Eq. (57), the last equality follows by evaluating QT · n0 for the 24 elements of the cubic symmetry
group (A. J. M. Spencer, 1971, Table 1). Since this symmetry group has a finite number of elements,
application of the group symmetrization ensures exact fulfillment of the material symmetry condition.
Furthermore, the group symmetrization operation preserves the polyconvexity of the function, cf. (Klein
et al., 2022a, Section 3.2). Thus, the function f in Eq. (55) is a polyconvex invariant of the cubic O
group.




                                                            16
Corollary 3.2 (Polyconvex cubic invariants based on group symmetrization). Based on Theo-
rem 3.2, we construct the polyconvex invariants
                   3 h                 i2                                       3 h                 i3
                          (i)   (i)                                                    (i)   (i)
                   X                                                            X
         I1cub =         n0 ⊗ n0 : C        ,                         I2cub =         n0 ⊗ n0 : C        ,
                   i=1                                                          i=1
                   3 h                            i2                            3 h              i2
                          (i)  (i)      (i)  (i)                                       (i)  (i)
                   X                                                            X
         I3cub =         n0 ⊗ n0 : C + n0 ⊗ n0 : G ,                  I4cub =         n0 ⊗ n0 : G ,          (58)
                   i=1                                                          i=1
                   3 h           i2 h          i2                             3 h              i3
                        (i)  (i)       (i) (i)                                         (i)  (i)
                   X                                                            X
         I5cub =       n0 ⊗ n0 : C + n0 ⊗ n0 : G    ,                 I6cub =         n0 ⊗ n0 : G .
                   i=1                                                          i=1

The invariants I1−6cub
                       and I1−3
                            iso
                                can represent J1−6
                                                 cub
                                                     and J1−3iso
                                                                  , see App. B.1 and B.6. Thereby, I1−5
                                                                                                     cub
                                                                                                         can be
formulated as polynomials of I1−5 and I1−3 . However, the representation of J6 in terms of I1−6
                                  cub        iso                                       cub              cub
                                                                                                            and
 iso
I1−3  is not a polynomial, as it includes a division by I1iso , cf. Eq. (B.42). Thus, I1−6
                                                                                       cub
                                                                                           and I1−3
                                                                                                iso
                                                                                                    form only a
functional basis but not an integrity basis for cubic anisotropy. Furthermore, the representation of I1−6   cub

in terms of J1−6
               cub
                    in App. B.6 verifies that the former are invariants of the cubic O group.

(C) Extension of the polyconvex integrity basis Based on Eq. (55), additional polyconvex cubic
invariants could be constructed that might improve the flexibility of the constitutive model. More-
over, Eq. (55) could be employed as part of the constitutive model with trainable material parameters
{a1 , a2 , b1 , b2 , c}.

3.4    On (in-)complete polyconvex integrity or functional bases for anisotropy
Above, we have presented polyconvex integrity and functional bases for several material symmetry groups,
including five crystal groups, one transversely isotropic group, and the isotropic group. However, six more
crystal groups and one more transversely isotropic group are also relevant in hyperelastic constitutive
modeling. To the best of our knowledge, no polyconvex integrity or functional bases have been proposed
for these remaining symmetry groups. The formulation of polyconvex bases for all symmetry groups
entails challenges such as invariants that include higher-order powers of C, structural tensors that are
not p.s.d., and complex fourth- and sixth-order structural tensors. As we demonstrated for tetrago-
nal and cubic anisotropy, group symmetrization provides an alternative approach to the formulation of
anisotropic invariants and may present an opportunity for the construction of further polyconvex integrity
or functional bases. To conclude, for a large share of symmetry groups, no polyconvex integrity or func-
tional basis is available. As a consequence, polyconvex constitutive models for such symmetry groups are
based on incomplete sets of invariants. This leads to a loss of information, thus limiting the flexibility
of the constitutive models. We provide a comprehensive discussion on such limitations of polyconvex
constitutive modeling in Klein et al. (2026b).


4     Polyconvex PANN constitutive modeling
In this section, we discuss different polyconvex constitutive models based on physics-augmented neural
networks (PANNs). The PANN constitutive models are based on monotonic and convex neural networks
which are introduced in Section 4.1. Subsequently, in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, we discuss polyconvex PANN
modeling approaches based on invariants constructed via structural tensors, as well as an approach based
on triclinic invariants and group symmetrization.

4.1    Monotonic and convex neural networks
In this work, we consider constitutive models based on feed-forward neural networks (FFNNs), which
are a common type of artificial neural network (Aggarwal, 2018; Herrmann et al., 2025). In a nutshell,
FFNNs consist of multiple compositions of vector-valued layers, where each layer alternates between
vector-valued affine transformations and element-wise applied nonlinear functions. The components in
the layers are referred to as nodes or neurons, and the function acting in each node is called the activation
function. The number of nodes in a layer is referred to as width and the number of layers is referred to
as depth of the NN. We consider scalar-valued FFNNs given as the mapping
                                        F : Rn → R ,        x 7→ F (x) ,                                     (59)


                                                       17
where F is recursively defined as

                       x(h) = σ (h) W (h) · x(h−1) + b(h)       ∈ Rnh ,
                                                            
                                                                          h = 1, . . . H ,
                                                                                                          (60)
                       F    = w(H+1) · x(H)                     ∈ R,

with x(0) = x and n0 = n. The layers from 1 to H are commonly referred to as hidden layers, while the
layer H + 1 is referred to as output layer. The weight matrices W (h) ∈ Rnh ×nh−1 , w(H+1) ∈ RnH and
the bias vectors b(h) ∈ Rnh form the set of parameters P that are optimized to fit the NN to a given
dataset. The component-wise applied activation function is denoted as σ (h) . Note that we employ a
linear activation function and no bias in the output layer. As originally proposed by (Amos et al., 2017),
the simple structure and recursive definition of Eq. (60) makes FFNNs a very natural choice for the
construction of monotonic and convex functions. We consider the following special FFNN architectures:

   • Input-convex neural network (ICNN): F is called an ICNN if it is convex in x (Amos et al.,
     2017). This can be ensured by the following conditions: (1) The activation function in the first
     layer σ (1) is convex and the activation functions in every subsequent layer σ (h) for h > 1 are convex
     and monotonic. (2) The weights in every layer except the first one must be non-negative, i.e.,
     (w(H+1) )i , (W (h) )ij ≥ 0 for h > 1.
   • Convex-monotonic neural network (CMNN): F is called a CMNN if it is convex and mono-
     tonic in x. This can be ensured by the following conditions: (1) All activation functions σ (h) are
     convex and monotonic. (2) All weights are non-negative.
Due to their linearity, for both ICNNs and CMNNs, the biases can be chosen arbitrarily. For an explicit
proof of convexity and monotonicity, the reader is referred to (Klein et al., 2022a, Appendix A).

4.2     Polyconvex PANN model based on invariants constructed via structural
        tensors
In hyperelasticity, a large share of classical constitutive models is formulated in terms of invariants (Ricker
and Wriggers, 2023; Schröder and Neff, 2003; Steinmann et al., 2012). In this way, the models fulfill
objectivity and material symmetry by construction (cf. Eqs. (4) and (5)). While classical constitutive
models are based on a sound mechanical basis, in many cases, their flexibility and thus applicability to
represent complex material behaviors remains limited. To address this lack of flexibility, constitutive
models based on PANNs can be employed.

4.2.1   Neural network potential
Arguably, the neural network is one of the most crucial components of a PANN material model. In our
framework, FFNNs are employed to represent hyperelastic potentials, meaning we consider FFNNs that
take the invariants I □ ∈ Rm as input, and have a scalar-valued output that is used as a part of the
hyperelastic potential. This NN potential provides the constitutive model with flexibility (Hornik, 1991).
In general, FFNNs with an arbitrary amount of nodes and layers can be employed. However, very small
FFNNs have proven to be sufficiently flexible for representing energy potentials across various scenarios
(Kalina et al., 2025; Klein et al., 2024; Linka et al., 2020). Thus, without loss of generality, we start by
considering an exemplary single-layered FFNN
                                                                     
                                     NN
                                    ψ□  = w(2) · SP W (1) · I □ + b(1) ,                                (61)

where ψ□ NN
             is the NN potential. Furthermore, □ denotes the considered symmetry group for which the
model is formulated. In Eq. (61), the convex and monotonic softplus activation function SP = log(1+ex )
is applied component-wise. The trainable parameters of ψ□  NN
                                                              are denoted as P = {w(2) , W (1) , b(1) } and
consist of the weights w ∈ R , W
                          (2)    n     (1)
                                           ∈R n×m
                                                   and the bias b(1) ∈ Rn . The choice of invariants I □
depends on the symmetry group being examined and whether the model is constructed as polyconvex,
where different sets of invariants are introduced in Section 3.3. For this PANN modeling approach, we
only employ invariants based on structural tensors and isotropic extension. Lastly, for a single-layered
NN architecture, the hyperparameter n controls the size of the weight and bias matrices. As n increases,
both the number of trainable parameters and the model’s flexibility grow. Note that to this point, the
NN potential only fulfills thermodynamic consistency, objectivity, and the material symmetry condition


                                                      18
by construction, and that Eq. (61) could be replaced by multi-layered FFNN architectures introduced
in Section 4.1. For the fully physics-augmented neural network, the NN potential is complemented by
additional growth and normalisation terms, both introduced in Section 4.2.3.

4.2.2   Polyconvexity
Hyperelastic potentials based on FFNNs can be formulated to be polyconvex, which was originally pro-
posed by Klein et al. (2022a). Recall the theoretical foundations laid so far:
   • Sufficient conditions for an invariant-based potential to be polyconvex are that (i) the potential is
     convex and monotonic in the invariants and (ii) only polyconvex invariants are employed (cf. Sec-
     tion 3.1.2).
   • A FFNN can be constructed so that its output is convex and monotonic in its input. We call
     this architecture CMNN. This is achieved by a special choice of FFNN architecture, i.e., by using
     suitable activation functions and restricting the weights to be non-negative (cf. Section 4.1).
Thus, by employing a CMNN that takes polyconvex invariants as inputs, a polyconvex
potential can be constructed. For the exemplary NN potential in Eq. (61), this translates to the
following conditions. The softplus activation function is convex and monotonic. Thus, when all weights
are non-negative, the potential in Eq. (61) becomes a CMNN (cf. Section 4.1). Furthermore, when Eq. (61)
includes only polyconvex invariants, the overall NN potential is polyconvex. Sets of polyconvex invariants
for different symmetry groups are introduced in Section 3.3. Note that for non-polyconvex modeling,
also non-polyconvex invariants can be employed and the NN potential is not subject to convexity or
monotonicity constraints.
Remark 4.1. Setting aside the nomenclature of machine learning, one could consider Eq. (61) as a clas-
sical constitutive model that uses linear transformations and the nonlinear softplus function as an ansatz
for hyperelastic potentials, with the weights W (1) , w(2) and the bias b(1) serving as material parameters.
One key benefit lies in the immediate increase in flexibility for the NN potential, achievable by increasing
the size of the weight and biases matrices, i.e., using more nodes in the hidden layer. Furthermore,
multiple hidden layers can be employed. Thereby, the NN approach in Section 4.2.1 has demonstrated
high stability during calibration, even when involving a large number of parameters (Gärtner et al., 2021;
Kalina et al., 2024; Linka et al., 2020). On this matter, NN potentials that are restricted by suitable
constitutive constraints are known to be very robust against phenomena such as overfitting, which are
known to occur for other NN applications (Herrmann et al., 2025). This is due to the fact that the
incorporation of physical principles provides the model with a pronounced mathematical structure (Klein
et al., 2026a; Linden et al., 2023).
    Furthermore, the NN potential in Eq. (61) enables strong interdependencies among the different in-
variants. This is a particular distinction from conventional polyconvex models. There, the potential is
usually additively decomposed in the invariants (Ebbing, 2010). The reason is that the multiplication
of polyconvex invariants generally does not preserve polyconvexity (Schröder and Neff, 2003). In con-
trast, NN-based potentials enable a pronounced coupling between the invariants while simultaneously
maintaining polyconvexity. Note that the discussion from above equally transfers to multi-layered NN
architectures.

4.2.3   Growth and normalization conditions
To fulfil all common constitutive conditions of hyperelasticity, the NN potential is complemented by
additional growth and normalization terms. This results in the overall PANN model given by
                           PANN
                          ψ□    (I □ ) = ψ□
                                          NN
                                             (I □ ) + ψ□
                                                       stress
                                                              (I □ ) + ψ growth (J) .                  (62)
Here, ψ□ stress
                and ψ growth denote the normalization and growth terms, which ensure fulfillment of the
stress normalization condition and the volumetric growth condition (cf. Eqs. (6) and (7)). The overall
flow and structure of the PANN model is visualized in Fig. 1a. From Eq. (62), the first Piola-Kirchhoff
stress of the PANN model P PANN□     follows as (cf. Eq. (3))
                         P PANN
                           □
                                      PANN
                                = dF ψ□          NN
                                           = dF ψ□        stress
                                                    + dF ψ□      + dF ψ growth .                       (63)
Following Klein et al. (2022a), the growth term ψ growth is chosen as
                                                              2
                                ψ growth (J) := α J + J −1 − 2 , α > 0 ,                               (64)


                                                      19
which is convex in J and thus polyconvex (Hartmann and Neff, 2003). Since ψ growth only depends on
the isotropic invariant J, it is compatible with every symmetry group. Note that ψ growth also happens
to fulfill the volumetric coercivity condition in Eq. (11).
    Furthermore, we employ the stress normalization approach proposed by Linden et al. (2023), which is
compatible with all discussed constitutive conditions of compressible hyperelasticity. Based on invariants,
it preserves objectivity and material symmetry of the PANN model. Furthermore, polyconvexity of the
stress normalization terms is ensured by carefully choosing their functional form. In Linden et al. (2023),
polyconvex normalization terms are introduced for the isotropic K and the transversely isotropic D∞
groups. We recall the normalization approach for transverse isotropy and exemplary extend the approach
for cubic anisotropy. Note that corresponding terms could be formulated for the other anisotropies
discussed in Section 3.

Transversely isotropic normalization term In Linden et al. (2023), the transversely isotropic stress
normalization term
                          stress
                         ψti     (J, I1ti , I2ti ) = −2(o + q) J + p I1ti + q I2ti ,            (65)
is proposed, with the constants
                             "
                                          NN            NN               1         NN           NN
                                                                                                    
                              o = ∂I1iso ψti + 2∂I2iso ψti +                ∂I3iso ψti − ∂I4iso ψti
                                                                         2
                                                                                   #                                               (66)
                                              NN          NN          NN
                                     + ∂I2ti ψti + ∂I3ti ψti + ∂I4ti ψti                      ∈ R,
                                                                                     F =I

                                     p = RL(−x) ∈ R+ ,                   q = RL(x) ∈ R+ ,                                          (67)
and                              "                                                            #
                                       NN
                            x = ∂I1ti ψti          NN
                                          − ∂I3ti ψti          NN
                                                      − ∂I2ti ψti          NN
                                                                  + ∂I4ti ψti                            ∈ R,                      (68)
                                                                                                  F =I

where RL(x) = max(x, 0). This stress normalization term is polyconvex as it is linear in J and the
constants p, q in Eq. (65) are non-negative. Note that Eq. (66) is a slightly adapted version of the formu-
lation in Linden et al. (2023), as we consider the additional transversely isotropic invariants in Eq. (35).
After calibration, p, q remain constant, and the non-differentiability of the RL function in Eq. (67) poses
no problem.

Cubic normalization term Based on the method proposed by (Linden et al., 2023), we introduce the
new cubic stress normalization term
                                                                         1         1
                             stress
                            ψcub    (J, I1cub , I2cub ) = −2 (r + 3t) J + s I1cub + t I4cub ,                                      (69)
                                                                         2         2
with the constants
                       "
                             NN             NN            1        NN            NN
                                                                                      
                 r = ∂I1iso ψcub + 2∂I2iso ψcub +           ∂I3iso ψcub − ∂I4iso ψcub
                                                          2
                                                                                                          #                        (70)
                                                                                
                                      NN                     NN            NN                   NN
                           + 6∂I4cub ψcub + 12       ∂I3cub ψcub + ∂I5cub ψcub       + 9∂I6cub ψcub                  ∈ R,
                                                                                                              F =I

                                     s = RL(−x) ∈ R+ ,                    t = RL(x) ∈ R+ ,                                         (71)
and          "                                                                                                  #
                                                                                       
         x= 2                NN
                     ∂I1cub ψcub           NN
                                 − ∂I4cub ψcub       +3               NN
                                                              ∂I2cub ψcub           NN
                                                                          − ∂I6cub ψcub                  NN
                                                                                              + 4∂I5cub ψcub                ∈ R.   (72)
                                                                                                                     F =I

This stress normalization term is polyconvex as it is linear in J and the constants s, t in Eq. (69) are
non-negative. Note that Eq. (69) is only one possible choice for the construction of polyconvex stress
normalization terms for cubic anisotropy, and corresponding approaches could be formulated making use
of different cubic invariants. However, in preliminary studies, the choice of the cubic stress normalization
term had no influence on the performance of the PANN model.


                                                                    20
                                                          P PANN
                                                            □                                                           P PANN
                                                                                                                          □


          I1iso                                            dF                     ĉ1                M□                 dF
 F
           ..         CMNN      ψ□NN +ψ□stress + ψ growth = ψ□PANN        F        ..     CMNN   ΦNN +Φstress + Φgrowth = ΦPANN
            .                                                                       .                                      □

 S□        □
          Im                                                                      ĉ14

(a) PANN–I model using structural tensor-based invariants.            (b) PANN–C model based on triclinic invariants and group
                                                                      symmetrization.

Figure 1: Illustration of the different polyconvex PANN constitutive models. The models include material sym-
metry by either structural tensors S □ or a group symmetrization operation M□ , where □ denotes the considered
symmetry group.


4.3      Polyconvex PANN model based on triclinic invariants and group sym-
         metrization
Constitutive models are often formulated in terms of structural tensor-based invariants (cf. Section 4.2).
However, employing these invariants in polyconvex constitutive modeling can significantly limit the flex-
ibility of such models. In particular, formulating polyconvex integrity or functional bases is highly
nontrivial and remains an open challenge for most symmetry groups (cf. Section 3.4). Thus, a potential
based on these invariants cannot represent every function associated with the considered anisotropy, and
such models may fail to represent certain material behaviors, even if, in principle, a suitable polyconvex
potential might exist. Moreover, to anticipate Section 5, even if a polyconvex integrity or functional basis
is available for the considered symmetry group, in practice, it can be advantageous to employ an alterna-
tive polyconvex constitutive model formulation. Overall, this motivates the development of an alternative
polyconvex PANN approach based on triclinic invariants and group symmetrization (cf. Section 3.2.2).
    While in Klein et al. (2022a), a polyconvex PANN model based on triclinic invariants and group
symmetrization is introduced, this approach employs invariants of the deformation gradient F instead of
C, and is thus not objective by construction. Clearly, a model formulation based on triclinic invariants
of the right Cauchy-Green tensor C would be more appealing, as this deformation measure is objective.
While several triclinic PANN constitutive models have been proposed (As’ad et al., 2022; Fernández
et al., 2021; L. Zheng et al., 2024), to the best of our knowledge, none of them is polyconvex. In the
following, a polyconvex PANN constitutive model based triclinic invariants of the right Cauchy-Green
tensor C and group symmetrization is introduced.

4.3.1     Neural network potential and polyconvexity
Let us consider the potential
                                                   ψ : R14 → R ,          ĉ 7→ ψ(ĉ) ,                                      (73)
with W (F ) = ψ(ĉ) that is formulated in terms of the 14-tuple

        ĉ = C11 , C22 , C33 , (C11 + C22 + 2C12 )/2, (C11 + C33 + 2C13 )/2, (C22 + C33 + 2C23 )/2,
                  G11 , G22 , G33 , (G11 + G22 + 2G12 )/2, (G11 + G33 + 2G13 )/2, (G22 + G33 + 2G23 )/2,                     (74)
                  J, −J ∈ R14 .
                         


We derived the tuple ĉ in Section 3.2.1 and now recall its properties. The first row of Eq. (74) is
a polyconvex integrity basis for triclinic anisotropy. We extended this polyconvex integrity basis by
polyconvex triclinic invariants of G, as well as J, aiming to improve the expressiveness of the potential
in Eq. (73). Including invariants of C, G, and J, every element of Eq. (74) is objective. Thus, the
potential in Eq. (73) is also objective. Since ĉ is an integrity basis for triclinic anisotropy and triclinic
anisotropy is the most general form of anisotropy, the potential in Eq. (73) can represent arbitrary
(an-)isotropic material behavior.
    All elements of ĉ are polyconvex, and consequently, polyconvexity of ψ can be ensured by formulating
it as a convex and monotonic function (cf. Section 3.1.2). Thus, a polyconvex potential can be constructed
by representing the potential ψ by a CMNN:

                                                         ψ(ĉ) = ψ NN (ĉ) .                                                 (75)


                                                                     21
Remark 4.2 (Convexity in C and polyconvexity). Some works employ a similar convexity condition,
where the hyperelastic potential is convex in the non-polyconvex triclinic integrity basis (cf. Eq. (32)),
i.e., in the six independent coordinates of C (As’ad et al., 2022; L. Zheng et al., 2024). This does not
ensure polyconvexity, which becomes evident from Eq. (17). While for such models, the constitutive
type term is p.s.d., the geometric type term can take negative eigenvalues as (i) the potential is not a
monotonically increasing function and (ii) not all coordinates of C are polyconvex. Still, convexity of the
potential in C can be seen as a relaxed polyconvexity condition. Importantly, convexity of the potential
in C does not imply ellipticity (Yang Gao et al., 2017).

4.3.2    Normalization, material symmetry, and growth conditions
To this point, the NN potential ψ NN introduced in Eq. (75) is thermodynamically consistent, objective,
and polyconvex, but does not fulfill the remaining conditions of hyperelasticity by construction. To ensure
stress normalization, the potential ψ NN is complemented by the normalization term ψ stress , i.e.,
                                       ψeNN (ĉ) = ψ NN (ĉ) + ψ stress (ĉ) .                            (76)
For the construction of the stress normalization term, we employ the fact that the projections contained in
ĉ (cf. Eq. (20)) have the same structure as the transversely isotropic invariants introduced in Section 3.3.2.
Thus, the polyconvex invariant-based stress normalization terms proposed by Linden et al. (2023) for
transverse isotropy can immediately be employed (cf. Section 4.2.3). For each of the elements in ĉ, one
such normalization term can be formulated, and the overall stress normalization term ψ stress is their sum.
Then, by complementing the potential by a growth term ψ growth (J), the volumetric growth condition can
be fulfilled. Here, we employ the growth term introduced in Eq. (64).
     In case of a finite symmetry group G, we employ a group symmetrization (Fernández et al., 2021),
and the overall PANN constitutive model is given by
                                         1 X h eNN               i
                               PANN
                              ψ□     =            ψ    ĉ(Q ⋆ C) + ψ growth (J) ,                         (77)
                                        |G|
                                           Q∈G

where |G| is the number of elements in the symmetry group. We provide further discussions on the
group symmetrization in Section 3.2.2. To recall its most important properties, for finite symmetry
groups such as the cubic one, group symmetrization ensures exact fulfillment of the material symmetry
condition. Furthermore, it preserves polyconvexity of a function. Thus, for finite symmetry groups,
the PANN model introduced in Eq. (77) fulfills all relevant constitutive conditions of hyperelasticity by
construction. The overall flow and structure of the model is visualized in Fig. 1b. From Eq. (77), the
first Piola-Kirchhoff stress of the PANN model P PANN
                                                 □     follows as (cf. Eq. (3))
                                         1  X  h                  i
                  P PANN
                    □     =dF ψ□ PANN
                                      =         dF ψeNN ĉ(Q ⋆ C) + dF ψ growth (J) .                (78)
                                        |G|
                                              Q∈G

Notably, the multiple evaluations of ψeNN required for the group symmetrisation increase the compu-
tational cost of the approach compared to the PANN models using structural tensor-based invariants
introduced in Section 3. The increase in computational effort can be partly mitigated with an efficient
batch-wise evaluation of the NN potential (Aggarwal, 2018). Alternatively, instead of fulfilling material
symmetry in an exact fashion through group symmetrization, it can be approximately fulfilled by aug-
menting the calibration data with the known symmetry relations (Gärtner et al., 2021). Furthermore, this
model could also be employed without incorporating material symmetry at all, which could be beneficial
in scenarios where no information about the underlying symmetry of the material is available.


5       Application to homogenization data of cubic metamaterials
In this section, we apply different polyconvex PANN constitutive models to synthetic homogenization
data of cubic metamaterials. In Section 5.1, we provide information on the considered datasets, PANN
models, and calibration strategy. This is followed by an evaluation of the calibrated PANN models
in Section 5.2.

5.1     Data and PANN model preparation
We now provide technical details on the considered datasets and PANN constitutive models.


                                                         22
                (a) BCC lattice metamaterial.           (b) Matrix with spherical inclusion (SPH).
                Image from (Fernández et al., 2021).    Image from (Kalina et al., 2025).

                               Figure 2: Microstructures considered in this work.


5.1.1   Considered homogenization data
We consider synthetic homogenization data of two different materials with heterogeneous microstructures
with cubic material symmetry, which are visualized in Fig. 2. In both cases, the effective material behavior
can be described with the cubic O group (Fernández et al., 2021; Kalina et al., 2025). The considered
metamaterials are briefly introduced in the following.

Body-centered cubic lattice metamaterial (BCC) A BCC structure consists of body-centered
beams with additional beams along all edges, see Fig. 2a. The smallest repeating unit, referred to as the
BCC unit cell, contains beams only at three edges due to the periodicity of the structure. The effective
material behavior has a cubic anisotropy. We consider data from Fernández et al. (2021), where a BCC
cell is numerically homogenized. In this study, the beams are modeled as Timoshenko beam elements
composed of a linear elastic, isotropic material. Nevertheless, the effective material behavior of the BCC
unit cell is highly nonlinear due to geometrically nonlinear deformations.
     For the data generation, load scenarios inspired by physical experiments are applied, such as uniaxial
deformation and shear. To evaluate the model performance under general deformation states, more
complex load scenarios such as a mixed shear-tension test (“test 3” in Fernández et al. (2021)) are
also considered. We only consider a part of the overall dataset provided by Fernández et al. (2021),
in particular, the uniaxial load case, the shear case, and the mixed shear-tension test. The different
load paths have 175, 101, and 172 datapoints, respectively. We employ uniaxial tension and shear for
calibration and the mixed case for testing. In the invariant space, the considered load scenarios are within
I1iso ∈ [2.5, 3.3] and I2iso ∈ [1.9, 3.3], thus covering a finite deformation regime. From the homogenization,
stress–strain datasets of the form
                                               n                                  o
                                                  1
                                                    F , 1 P , . . . , (m F , m P ) ,                      (79)
                                                           
                                          D=

are obtained.

Matrix with a single spherical inclusion (SPH) We consider a soft matrix material with a stiff
spherical inclusion, where the inclusion is centered and has a volume fraction of 20%, see Fig. 2b. We
consider data from Kalina et al. (2025), where a SPH is numerically homogenized. Therein, both material
phases are described by the isotropic Neo-Hooke model
                                                1h                           λ◦ iso           i
                                          ψ◦ =     µ◦ (I1iso − log I3iso ) +    I3 − log I3iso ,
                                                2                            2
                                                                                                         (80)
                                  E◦                        E◦ ν◦
                 with   µ◦ =              ,   λ◦ =                         , ◦ ∈ {matrix, incl} .
                               2(1 + ν◦ )           (1 + ν◦ )(1 − 2ν◦ )

For the matrix material, the parameters Ematrix = 1 MPa and νmatrix = 0.4 are employed. For the
inclusion, the parameters Eincl = 1000 MPa and νincl = 0.3 are employed.
    For the data generation, the deformation gradient F is sampled in a wide range of physically admissible
deformation modes using a method described in Kalina et al. (2025, Appendix D). In the invariant space,
the sampled deformation states are within I1iso ∈ [2.99, 4.52] and I2iso ∈ [2.9, 4.9], thus covering a finite
deformation regime. For this material, we again consider a stress–strain dataset of the form in Eq. (79).
We employ 800 datapoints for calibration and roughly 3000 datapoints for testing.




                                                       23
Ellipticity of the homogenization data Polyconvex constitutive models can represent only elliptic
material behavior. Thus, we want to consider the effective material behavior of the metamaterials only
within their elliptic regime. It is important to note that even if the microstructure of the material is
described by polyconvex (and thus elliptic) material models, the homogenized behavior might still be non-
elliptic (Bertoldi and Gei, 2011; Rudykh and deBotton, 2012). To assess ellipticity of the homogenization
dataset, the effective tangent A = dF P is required. When A is available, the ellipticity condition Eq. (8)
can be numerically evaluated by checking p.s.d. of the acoustic tensor Qij = Aiαjβ aα aβ , cf. (Schröder
et al., 2005, Sec. 5). While for the BCC material, no values for the tangent A are provided in the
dataset, the excellent performance of a polyconvex PANN model applied to this dataset in Klein et al.
(2022a), along with the numerical results presented in this work, suggest that the homogenized BCC cell
behaves elliptic within the considered deformation range. For the SPH material, the effective tangent A
is available, and less than 1% of the datapoints are non-elliptic and excluded in the further investigations.

5.1.2    Considered PANN models
For the metamaterials considered in this work, the preferred directions are known and the structural
tensors and elements of the cubic symmetry group O are chosen accordingly. The hyperparameters are
chosen based on preliminary studies and in accordance to literature standards (Fernández et al., 2021;
Kalina et al., 2025; Klein et al., 2022a; Klein et al., 2022b). We employ the following PANN models,
which were introduced in detail in Section 4:

PANN models using structural tensor-based invariants We employ both polyconvex and non-
polyconvex PANN models for cubic anisotropy (cf. Section 4.2). For the NN potentials, FFNNs with a
two hidden layer and 16 nodes are employed (H = 2, n1 = 16). In the following, such models that are
polyconvex are denoted by PANN–I and non-polyconvex models by PANN–I ∗ . Following Section 3.3,
the invariants are chosen as
           
            I1iso , I2iso , I3iso , J1cub , J2cub , J3cub , J4cub , J5cub , J6cub           ∈ R9 ,  (PANN–I ∗ )
                                                                                   
   I cub
         =                   q                                                                                   . (81)
            I iso , I iso , I iso , I iso , I cub , I cub , I cub , I cub , I cub , I cub  ∈ R10 ,  (PANN–I)
                1     2           3      4      1       2      3       4      5       6


PANN models based on triclinic invariants and group symmetrization We employ the poly-
convex PANN model introduced in Section 4.3, which is denoted by PANN-C. In addition, we consider a
non-polyconvex PANN model that takes the non-polyconvex triclinic integrity basis introduced in Eq. (18)
as input for the NN potential. For this model, an ICNN is employed, i.e., its potential is convex in all
coordinates of the right Cauchy-Green tensor. As elaborated in Remark 4.2, this model is not poly-
convex by construction. To ensure stress normalization, a projection approach is employed (Fernández
et al., 2021). In the following, this model is denoted by PANN-C ∗ . For the NN potentials, FFNNs with
three hidden layers and 8 nodes are employed (H = 3, n1−3 = 8). For these PANN models, the group
symmetrization (cf. Section 3.2.2) is carried out with the 24 elements of the cubic symmetry group O
(A. J. M. Spencer, 1971).

5.1.3    Model calibration
We now introduce details on the model calibration. Recall that the weights and biases of the NNs form the
set of parameters P of the PANN model. Overall, the PANN–I/I ∗ /C/C ∗ models have 464 / 448 / 272 /
208 trainable parameters.

Formulation of the loss function The overall dataset is split into a calibration dataset consisting
of mc datapoints and a test dataset consisting of mt = m − mc datapoints. To fit the PANN model
parameters P to a given dataset D, a loss function L is minimized. We consider the loss function given
as the mean squared error (MSE) of the stress predictions
                                                m
                                                c
                                           1 X     1                 model i         2
                                                        i
                                 L(P) =                     P − iP        ( F , P)       ,                        (82)
                                           mc i=1 9⋆

where ⋆ is introduced to make the loss function dimensionless. For the BCC material, we set ⋆ = hPa,
while for the SPH material, we set ⋆ = MPa. All PANN models are solely calibrated on first derivatives
of the strain energy, even if data for the second derivative is available. The calibration of the PANN


                                                            24
                            uniaxial tension                                shear                                    mixed test case
           22                                              15                                       22
                          P11   P33
                          P12   P21
           Pij in hPa




                                                           Pij in hPa




                                                                                                    Pij in hPa
PANN–C




               0                                                                                        0
                                      log10 MSE: -1.70         0                 log10 MSE: -2.03                          log10 MSE: -0.48

                    0.6   F11     1                  1.5                0    F12              0.5            0.5   F11       1            1.4
           22                                              15                                       22
           Pij in hPa




                                                           Pij in hPa




                                                                                                    Pij in hPa
PANN–I




               0                                                                                        0
                                      log10 MSE: -0.59         0                 log10 MSE: 0.14                            log10 MSE: 0.23

                    0.6   F11     1                  1.5                0    F12              0.5            0.5   F11       1            1.4
           22                                              15                                       22
PANN–C ∗




                                                                                                    Pij in hPa
           Pij in hPa




                                                           Pij in hPa




               0                                                                                        0
                                      log10 MSE: -1.92         0                 log10 MSE: -3.23                          log10 MSE: -0.91

                    0.6   F11     1                  1.5                0    F12              0.5            0.5   F11       1            1.4
           22                                              15                                       22
PANN–I ∗




                                                                                                    Pij in hPa
           Pij in hPa




                                                           Pij in hPa




               0                                                                                        0
                                      log10 MSE: -1.91         0                 log10 MSE: -3.08                          log10 MSE: -0.07

                    0.6   F11     1                  1.5                0    F12              0.5            0.5   F11       1            1.4

Figure 3: Performance of different PANN models for the BCC data. Circles denote the calibration data, squares
the test data, and solid lines the model predictions. Shaded areas indicate a loss of ellipticity.


models through their gradients is referred to as Sobolev training (Czarnecki et al., 2017; Vlassis and Sun,
2021). Since we focus on the prediction of the derivatives of the energy potentials in this work, we do
not consider energy values in the calibration process. This decision is supported by the observation that
including energy data in the calibration process does not enhance the prediction quality of the PANN
model’s derivatives (Klein et al., 2022a).

Implementation and calibration details The PANN models are implemented and calibrated using
the KLAX library (https://drenderer.github.io/klax/). The parameter optimization is performed
with the ADAM optimizer, employing the full calibration dataset, a mini-batch size of 32 with batch
shuffeling, without loss weighting, for 250 000 steps, and with a learning rate of 5 · 10−3 . For the SPH
material, this is followed by a re-calibration with the SLSQP optimizer, employing the full calibration
dataset, a mini-batch size of 32 with batch shuffeling, without loss weighting, for a maximum of 750
iterations, and with a solver tolerance of 5 · 10−32 . In each investigation, the PANN models are calibrated
five times, and the model with the lowest test loss is used for evaluation. By that, we account for the


                                                                            25
Table 2: log10 MSE for PANN models applied to the BCC and the SPH data. Each model is calibrated five times,
and the results for the model instance with the lowest calibration MSE are provided.


                                   PANN–C          PANN–I           PANN–C ∗          PANN–I ∗

         BCC     calibration       -1.8            -0.18            -2.1              -2.1
                 test              -0.48           0.23             -0.91             -0.07

         SPH     calibration       -2.45           -1.75            -3.53             -3.24
                 test              -2.38           -1.7             -3.38             -3.12


random initialization of the NN parameters and stochastic effects in the optimization process. For the
volumetric growth term (cf. Eq. (64)), the parameter α is set to 1 · 10−5 hPa (MPa) for the BCC (SPH)
material. In this way, it is ensured that the influence of the growth term within the deformations of
the available calibration and test data is negligible, and that it gets active only once large volumetric
compression occurs. The stress normalization terms are included in the model calibration process.

5.2    PANN model evaluation
In the following, we investigate the performance of different PANN constitutive models for the homoge-
nization data. Note that the BCC data is very sparse and only covers a few deformation modes, while
the SPH data contains significantly more datapoints and includes more general deformation modes.

Application to the BCC data We apply all PANN models to the BCC data. In Table 2, the loss
values of the best calibrated model instances are provided, while in Fig. 3, the stress predictions for the
different calibrated models are visualized. Due to buckling phenomena in the BCC structure’s beams, its
stress response is highly nonlinear. In particular, the stress curve shows a distinct change of slope around
the undeformed state for both uniaxial tension and the mixed test case, indicating a highly different
behavior for tension and compression. The polyconvex PANN–C model has an excellent performance
on both calibration cases and a decent prediction of the mixed test case. In contrast, the polyconvex
PANN–I model shows a moderate performance for the uniaxial load case and fails to predict both the
shear calibration case and the mixed test case. While for the BCC material, the ellipticity of the effective
material behavior cannot be evaluated directly, the excellent performance of the PANN–C suggests that
the BCC material remains elliptic within the considered deformation modes. Both non-polyconvex PANN
models show an excellent stress prediction for the calibration cases. For the test case, the PANN–C ∗ model
also has an excellent performance, while the PANN–I ∗ model has only a moderate performance. Notably,
these models did not adopt the ellipticity of the BCC material, but show a pronounced loss of ellipticity
across the investigated deformation scenarios. This is because the employed calibration data is very
sparse. This loss of ellipticity would cause convergence issues in numerical simulations and therefore
represents a significant limitation of the models.

Application to the SPH data We also apply all PANN models to the SPH data. In Table 2, the loss
values of the best calibrated model instances are provided, while in Fig. 4, three representative load cases
are visualized. Overall, the PANN–I has exhibits the lowest performance, while the PANN–C achieves
a better performance, but still shows visible deviations from the ground truth material behavior. Both
non-polyconvex models show an excellent performance in predicting the stress values. Recall that we
considered only elliptic datapoints for the SPH material. Since we employed sufficient calibration data,
the non-polyconvex PANN models could adopt the ellipticity of the SPH material, and are elliptic for all
datapoints of the test and calibration datasets.

Discussion For cubic anisotropy, both considered polyconvex PANN models fulfill all common consti-
tutive conditions a priori. However, the PANN–C outperforms the PANN–I for the considered materials.
This demonstrates that the specific choice of polyconvex model formulation can largely influence the
model performance. For the BCC material with limited data, the PANN–C further outperforms its non-
polyconvex counterparts by providing a stable, i.e., elliptic, representation, whereas the latter exhibit
a pronounced loss of ellipticity. In contrast, for the SPH material, the polyconvex models achieve only


                                                    26
                                   case A                                     case B                                 case C
             6                                                 0                                              4
                            P11   P33
                            P12   P23
           Pij in MPa




                                                             Pij in MPa




                                                                                                        Pij in MPa
PANN–C




                                        log10 MSE: -3.09                            log10 MSE: -2.3                    log10 MSE: -1.45
           -1                                                -7                                         -10
                        1               F11           1.35                1        F11            1.1      0.65       F11                 1
             6                                                 0                                              4
           Pij in MPa




                                                             Pij in MPa




                                                                                                        Pij in MPa
PANN–I




                                        log10 MSE: -2.07                           log10 MSE: -1.61                     log10 MSE: -0.9
           -1                                                -7                                         -10
                        1               F11           1.35                1        F11            1.1      0.65       F11                 1
             6                                                 0                                              4
           Pij in MPa




                                                             Pij in MPa




                                                                                                        Pij in MPa
PANN–C ∗




                                        log10 MSE: -2.96                           log10 MSE: -3.66                     log10 MSE: -2.6
           -1                                                -7                                         -10
                        1               F11           1.35                1        F11            1.1      0.65       F11                 1
             6                                                 0                                              4
           Pij in MPa




                                                             Pij in MPa
PANN–I ∗




                                                                                                        Pij in MPa




                                        log10 MSE: -4.01                           log10 MSE: -3.18                     log10 MSE: -3.5
           -1                                                -7                                         -10
                        1               F11           1.35                1        F11            1.1      0.65       F11                 1

Figure 4: Performance of different PANN models for the SPH data. Circles denote the calibration data, squares
the test data, and solid lines the model predictions.


moderate performance, while the non-polyconvex models accurately captures the material response and,
at least for the available data, learns an elliptic representation. This demonstrates that, given suitable
calibration data, also non-polyconvex models can be employed when more flexibility is required. When
only sparse calibration data is available, convexity-promoting loss terms could be included in the calibra-
tion process to improve the performance of non-polyconvex PANN models (Kalina et al., 2024). However,
non-polyconvex models come at the cost of losing ellipticity guarantees and can reduce the model gen-
eralization (Kalina et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2026a). Consequently, non-polyconvex models should be
employed with caution and only when strictly necessary.


6                 Conclusion
In this work, we addressed some open challenges in constitutive modeling for polyconvex anisotropic
hyperelasticity and physics-augmented neural network (PANN) constitutive modeling. We proposed a


                                                                              27
new polyconvex anisotropic PANN constitutive model which is based on triclinic invariants and group
symmetrization. For finite symmetry groups such as the cubic one, this model fulfills all common mechan-
ical conditions of hyperelasticity by construction. Moreover, we contributed to the theory of polyconvex
invariant theory, which is the basis of many polyconvex constitutive models. First, we provided a struc-
tured introduction into the construction of polyconvex integrity or functional bases. We proposed a group
symmetrization-based method for the construction of polyconvex invariants for finite symmetry groups.
Based on this, we derived a polyconvex integrity basis for the tetragonal D4 group and a polyconvex
functional basis for the cubic O symmetry group. We furthermore discussed polyconvex integrity bases
from the literature for the triclinic C1 , isotropic K, transversely isotropic D∞ , monoclinic C2 , and rhombic
D2 symmetry groups.
    We compared the performance of a polyconvex PANN model based on invariants constructed via
structural tensors and a polyconvex PANN model based on triclinic invariants and group symmetrization,
by applying them to homogenization data of cubic metamaterials. Although, for this symmetry group,
both approaches fulfill all common constitutive conditions of hyperelasticity a priori, the latter model
outperforms the former. This demonstrates that the specific choice of polyconvex model formulation can
have a pronounced influence on the model performance.
    In future works, the polyconvex PANN model based on triclinic invariants and group symmetriza-
tion should be extended to multiphysical material behavior, for which currently only approaches using
structural tensor-based invariants are available (Fuhg et al., 2024; Kalina et al., 2024; Klein et al., 2022b;
Ortigosa et al., 2025). While for isotropy, a polyconvex constitutive model with universal approximation
properties was recently proposed (Geuken et al., 2025; Wiedemann and Peter, 2023), the formulation
of such models for anisotropy remains an open challenge. Closely related to this, polyconvex integrity
or functional bases need to be established for all symmetry groups. The group symmetrization-based
approach proposed in this work may provide a promising pathway to achieve this. Despite the advances
presented in this work, many challenges remain, and polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity will continue
to be a demanding and fascinating field of research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement. D.K. Klein: Conceptualization, Methodology, Soft-
ware, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing, Visualization.
K.A. Kalina: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – review and editing. R. Or-
tigosa: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – review and editing. J. Martínez-Frutos:
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – review and editing. M. Kästner: Funding acqui-
sition, Writing – review and editing. O. Weeger: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing –
review and editing.
Conflict of interest. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgment. The authors would like to thank Brain M. Riemer for helpful discussions and
explanations on the theory of invariants. D.K. Klein and O. Weeger acknowledge the financial support
provided by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation, project number
492770117) and the Graduate School of Computational Engineering at TU Darmstadt. K.A. Kalina and
M. Kästner want to thank the DFG for the financial support within the Research Training Group GRK
2868 D3 –Project Number 493401063. R. Ortigosa and R. Martínez-Frutos acknowledge the support of
grant PID2022-141957OA-C22 funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by “ERDF A way of
making Europe”. They also acknowledge the support provided by the Autonomous Community of the
Region of Murcia, Spain through the programme for the development of scientific and technical research
by competitive groups (21996/PI/22), included in the Regional Program for the Promotion of Scientific
and Technical Research of Fundacion Seneca - Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnologia de la Region de Murcia.
Data availability. The authors have no data to share.
AI declaration. This manuscript was written independently and linguistically revised with the help of
ChatGPT, Grammarly, and DeepL.


A     Notation
Throughout this work, tensor spaces of rank greater than zero are denoted by

                                       Ln := R3 ⊗ · · · ⊗ R3 ∀n ∈ N+ ,                                   (A.1)
                                             |    {z       }
                                                 n−times




                                                      28
where R3 , N+ , and ⊗ denote the Euclidean vector space in R3 , the set of natural numbers excluding zero,
and the dyadic product, respectively. First, second, and fourth order tensors are denoted by a ∈ L1 ,
A ∈ L2 , and A ∈ L4 , respectively.
    Tensor compositions and contractions are denoted by (A·B)ij = Aik Bkj , (A·b)i = Aik bk , a·b = ai bi ,
A : B = Aij Bij , and (A : A)ij = Aijkl Akl , respectively, where Einstein’s summation convention is
applied. The tensor cross product operator is defined as (A B)iI = Eijk EIJK AjJ BkK , where EIJK
is the permutation symbol. The transpose and inverse of a second order tensor A are denoted by AT
and A−1 , while trace, determinant, and cofactor are denoted by tr A, det A, and cof A := det(A)A          −T
                                                                                                              ,
                                                                               √
respectively. Norms of tensors of order one and two are given by ∥a∥ = ai ai and ∥A∥ = Aij Aij ,
                                                                                                    p

respectively. The first Fréchet derivative of a function f w.r.t. A is denoted by ∂A f , the second Fréchet
derivative w.r.t. A and B is denoted by ∂AB 2
                                               f . Partial derivatives are denoted by ∂A f , total derivatives
are denoted by dA f . The gradient operator is denoted by ∇ = ∂xk (•)ek and the divergence operator by
∇·. A zero as a subscript next to the nabla symbol, i.e., ∇0 , indicates that the operation is carried out
in the reference configuration.
    As common in the literature, we do not explicitly distinguish between the algebraic structure of a
group and the associated set. For example, G can stand for the group given by the tuple (G,         ·) or the
set G of tensors involved therein. We consider in the R3 the general linear group GL+ (3) := A ∈ L2 |
det A > 0 , the space of symmetric positive definite tensors SYM+ (3) := A ∈ L2 | A = AT , a · A · a >
                                                                             

0 ∀a ∈ L1 \{0} , the orthogonal group O(3) := A ∈ L2 | AT · A = I , and the special orthogonal group
                                                  

SO(3) := A ∈ L2 | AT · A = I, det A = 1 , where I ∈ L2 denotes the second order identity tensor.
           

To enhance readability, function arguments are omitted throughout this work unless their inclusion is
required for clarity.


B      Relations between different invariant bases
We now provide functional relations between different invariant bases introduced in Section 3.3. For each
respective symmetry group, we provide
  (i) a representation of the polyconvex invariants Ii□ in terms of the general invariants Ji□ , to verify
      that the invariants Ii□ belong to the considered symmetry group, and
 (ii) a representation of the general invariants Ji□ in terms of the polyconvex invariants Ii□ , to investigate
      whether the latter form an integrity or functional basis for the considered symmetry group.
For (ii), we make use of the fact that we consider sets of general invariants I □ := (J1□ , . . . , Jm
                                                                                                     □
                                                                                                       ) ∈ Rm
that form minimal integrity bases for each respective symmetry group. For some of the symmetry groups,
these results are well-established, but we still provide them for the convenience of the reader. For triclinic
anisotropy, both (i) and (ii) are given by linear relationships. Thus, we do not consider triclinic anisotropy
in the following, and leave the calculations to the interested reader. After acceptance of the manuscript,
we will provide symbolic MATLAB code to verify the following calculations on a public GitHub repository.

B.1     Isotropic material behavior
We consider the isotropic K group, with the general invariants J1−3 iso
                                                                         as defined in Eq. (29) and the
polyconvex invariants I1−3 as defined in Eq. (30). The following results can also be found in, e.g., Itskov
                       iso

(2015, Eq. (4.29)) and Schröder and Neff (2003, Eq. (3.18)).

(i) Representation of polyconvex invariants in terms of general invariants
    • We have the trivial relation I1iso = J1iso .
    • The invariant I2iso can be expressed as
                                                        1  iso 2        
                                              I2iso =      J1      − J2iso .                             (B.1)
                                                        2
    • The invariant I3iso can be expressed as
                                                  1 iso 3 1 iso iso 1 iso
                                        I3iso =     J     − J1 J2 + J3 .                                 (B.2)
                                                  6 1      2         3
This verifies that I1−3
                    iso
                        are invariants of the isotropic K group.


                                                          29
(ii) Representation of general invariants in terms of polyconvex invariants
   • We have the trivial relation J1iso = I1iso .
   • The invariant J2iso can be expressed as
                                                                  2
                                                  J2iso = I1iso        − 2I2iso .                     (B.3)

   • The invariant J3iso can be expressed as
                                                          3
                                          J3iso = I3iso        − 3I1iso I2iso + 3I3iso .              (B.4)

The invariants J1−3
                 iso
                     can be expressed as polynomials of the invariants I1−3
                                                                        iso
                                                                            . Thus, the invariants I1−3
                                                                                                    iso

form an integrity basis for the isotropic K group.

B.2    Transversely isotropic material behavior
We consider the transversely isotropic D∞ group, with the general invariants J1,2 ti
                                                                                     as defined in Eq. (32)
and the polyconvex invariants I1,2 as defined in Eq. (34). The following results can also be found in, e.g.,
                               ti

Schröder and Neff (2003, Eq. (3.46)).

(i) Representation of polyconvex invariants in terms of general invariants
   • We have the trivial relation I1ti = J1ti .
   • The invariant I2ti can be expressed as
                                               1  iso 2        
                                      I2ti =      J1      − J2iso − J1iso J1ti + J2ti .               (B.5)
                                               2

This verifies that I1,2
                    ti
                        are invariants of the transversely isotropic D∞ group.

(ii) Representation of general invariants in terms of polyconvex invariants
   • We have the trivial relation J1ti = I1ti .
   • The invariant J2ti can be expressed as

                                                J2ti = I1iso I1ti − I2iso + I2ti .                    (B.6)

The invariants I1,2
                ti
                    and I1−3
                         iso
                             can represent J1−3
                                              iso
                                                  and J1,2
                                                        ti
                                                            as polynomials, see also App. B.1. Thus, I1,2
                                                                                                      ti

and I1−3 form an integrity basis for the transversely isotropicD∞ group.
     iso



B.3    Monoclinic material behavior
We consider the monoclinic C2 group, with the general invariants J1−5
                                                                  mon
                                                                      as defined in Eq. (40) and the
polyconvex invariants I1−5 as defined in Eq. (42).
                       mon



(i) Representation of polyconvex invariants in terms of general invariants
   • The invariant I1mon can be expressed as
                                                          1  mon      
                                                I1mon =      J2 − J1mon .                             (B.7)
                                                          2

   • The invariant I2mon can be expressed as

                                                  I2mon = J3mon − 3J1mon .                            (B.8)

   • The invariant I3mon can be expressed as

                                                I3mon = 6J3mon − 10J1mon .                            (B.9)


                                                           30
   • The invariant I4mon can be expressed as
                  1  iso 2         1                     1      2      2       2 
        I4mon =      J1      − J2iso +   J4mon − J1iso J2mon +   J2mon + J3mon − J1mon      . (B.10)
                  4                    2                       8

   • The invariant I5mon can be expressed as
                                            3  iso 2         3      2      2       2 
          I5mon = J5mon − J1iso J3mon +        J1      − J2iso +   J3mon − J1mon + J2mon      .      (B.11)
                                            2                    4

This verifies that I1−5
                    mon
                        are invariants of the monoclinic C2 group.

(ii) Representation of general invariants in terms of polyconvex invariants
   • The invariant J1mon can be expressed as
                                                           1 mon 3 mon
                                                J1mon =     I   − I2 .                               (B.12)
                                                           8 3   4

   • The invariant J2mon can be expressed as
                                                            3       1
                                            J2mon = 2I1mon − I2mon + I3mon .                         (B.13)
                                                            4       8

   • The invariant J3mon can be expressed as
                                                           3 mon 5 mon
                                                J3mon =     I   − I2 .                               (B.14)
                                                           8 3   4

   • The invariant J4mon can be expressed as
                                   2                       1                              
            J4mon = − I2iso − I1mon + 2 I1iso I1mon + I4mon +       I1iso I3mon − I1mon I3mon
                                                                  8                                  (B.15)
                      3  mon mon                   9          2   15                 25 mon 2
                              I2 − I1iso I2mon −         I mon + I2mon I3mon −
                                                              
                    +      I                                                                I    .
                      4 1                           256 3           64                 64 2

   • The invariant J5mon can be expressed as
                                     9
                                       2            5              3  iso mon            
        J5mon =I5mon − 3      + I2iso + I1mon I2mon − I1iso I2mon +
                               I1mon                                   I1 I3 − I1mon I3mon
                                        4            4              8                                (B.16)
                   45 mon mon 75 mon 2    27 mon 2
                  + I2 I3 −      I      −       I
                   64         64 2        256 3

The invariants I1−5
                mon
                     and I1,2
                           iso
                               can represent J1,2
                                              iso
                                                  and J1−5
                                                       mon
                                                           as polynomials, see also App. B.1. Thus, I1−5
                                                                                                     mon

and I1,2 form an integrity basis for the monoclinic C2 group.
     iso



B.4    Rhombic material behavior
We consider the rhombic D2 group, with the general invariants J1−4    rho
                                                                           as defined in Eq. (44) and the
polyconvex invariants I1−4 as defined in Eq. (46). Similar results can be found in Schröder and Neff
                        rho

(2003, Eq. (3.46)), where a different structural tensor for the general invariants is employed.

(i) Representation of polyconvex invariants in terms of general invariants
   • The invariant I1rho can be expressed as
                                                           1  rho      
                                                 I1rho =      J1 + J2rho .                           (B.17)
                                                           2

   • The invariant I2rho can be expressed as
                                                           1  rho      
                                                 I2rho =      J2 − J1rho .                           (B.18)
                                                           2

                                                           31
   • The invariant I3rho can be expressed as
                                1  iso 2                                                    
                        I3rho =    J1      − J1iso J1rho − J1iso J2rho − J2iso + J3rho + J4rho .           (B.19)
                                2

   • The invariant I4rho can be expressed as
                                1  iso 2                                                    
                        I4rho =    J1      + J1iso J1rho − J1iso J2rho − J2iso − J3rho + J4rho .           (B.20)
                                2

This verifies that I1−4
                    rho
                        are invariants of the rhombic D2 group.

(ii) Representation of general invariants in terms of polyconvex invariants
   • The invariant J1rho can be expressed as

                                                    J1rho = I1rho − I2rho .                                (B.21)

   • The invariant J2rho can be expressed as

                                                    J2rho = I1rho + I2rho .                                (B.22)

   • The invariant J3rho can be expressed as

                                       J3rho = I1iso I1rho − I1iso I2rho + I3rho − I4rho .                 (B.23)

   • The invariant J4rho can be expressed as

                                   J4rho = I1iso I1rho + I1iso I2rho − 2I2iso + I3rho + I4rho .            (B.24)

The invariants I1−4
                rho
                    and I1−3
                         iso
                             can represent J1−4
                                             rho
                                                 and J1−3
                                                      iso
                                                          as polynomials, see also App. B.1. Thus, I1−5
                                                                                                    mon

and I1−3 form an integrity basis for the rhombic D2 group.
     iso



B.5    Tetragonal material behavior
We consider the tetragonal D4 group, with the general invariants J1−5
                                                                  tet
                                                                      as defined in Eq. (48) and the
polyconvex invariants I1−5 as defined in Eq. (52).
                       tet



(i) Representation of polyconvex invariants in terms of general invariants
   • We have the trivial relations I1tet = J1tet and I2tet = J2tet .
   • The invariant I3tet can be expressed as
                                                                2
                                        I3tet = J3tet + J1iso        − J1tet J1iso − J2iso .               (B.25)

   • The invariant I4tet can be expressed as
                             1  iso 4         2            3               2                2
                     I4tet =    J1      + J2iso      − J1iso J1tet − J1iso J2iso + J1iso J2tet
                             2
                                    2                                                                     (B.26)
                             + J1iso J3tet + J1iso J2iso J1tet − 2J1iso J4tet − J2iso J3tet + J5tet .

   • The invariant I5tet can be expressed as

                                           I5tet = I2tet + I4tet + 2C : Mtet : G ,                         (B.27)

      with
                              1  iso 2 tet                                   1
             C : Mtet : G =             J1 − J2iso J1tet − J1iso J2tet + J4tet = I5tet − I2tet − I4tet .   (B.28)
                                                                                                      
                                 J1
                              2                                                 2

This verifies that I1−5
                    tet
                        are invariants of the tetragonal D4 group.


                                                           32
(ii) Representation of general invariants in terms of polyconvex invariants
   • We have the trivial relations J1tet = I1tet and J2tet = I2tet .
   • The invariant J3tet can be expressed as

                                                  J3tet = I1iso I1tet − 2I2iso + I3tet .                      (B.29)

   • The invariant J4tet can be expressed as

                                        J4tet = I1iso I2tet − I2iso I1tet + C : Mtet : G .                    (B.30)

   • The invariant J5tet can be expressed as
                        2                     2                                                     
           J5tet = I1iso I2tet + I4tet + 2 I2iso − I1iso I2iso I1tet + I1iso C : Mtet : G − I2iso I3tet .     (B.31)

The invariants I1−5
                tet
                    and I1−3
                         iso
                             can represent J1−5
                                              tet
                                                  and J1−3
                                                       iso
                                                           as polynomials, see also App. B.1. Thus, I1−5
                                                                                                     tet

and I1−3 form an integrity basis for the tetragonal D4 group.
     iso



B.6    Cubic material behavior
We consider the cubic O group, with the general invariants J1−6
                                                            cub
                                                                as defined in Eq. (54) and the polyconvex
invariants I1−6 as defined in Eq. (58).
            cub



(i) Representation of polyconvex invariants in terms of general invariants
   • We have the trivial relations I1cub = J1cub and I2cub = J2cub .
   • The invariant I3cub can be expressed as

                                        I3cub = I1cub + I4cub + 2C : Mcub : G ,                               (B.32)

      with
                                                       1  iso 3               1                      
             C : Mcub : G = J3cub − J1iso J1cub +         J1      − J1iso J2iso =   I3cub − I1cub − I4cub .   (B.33)
                                                       2                          2

   • The invariant I4cub can be expressed as
                                    2                     1     2       1  iso 2         4 
               I4cub = J4cub + J1iso J1cub − 2J1iso J3cub + J1iso J2iso −    J2      + J1iso      .           (B.34)
                                                           2              4

   • The invariant I5cub can be expressed as
                                                                3 h            i2 h
                                             4                 X   (i)  (i)         (i)  (i)
                                                                                               i
                       I5cub = tr Mcub : C        + I4cub + 2      n0 ⊗ n0 : C      n0 ⊗ n0 : G ,             (B.35)
                                                                i=1

      with
                                        4    1 cub 2               2 1       4 4
                          tr Mcub : C        =  J1      − J1cub J1iso + J1iso + J2cub J1iso
                                              2                           6         3                         (B.36)
                                              1 iso 4     iso 2 cub
                                                                       4 iso cub 1 cub 2
                                             = I1      − I1     I1 + I1 I2 + I1            ,
                                              6                         3          2
      and
         3 h                   i2 h
         X       (i)     (i)        (i)  (i)
                                              i                        1  cub iso 2               
                n0 ⊗ n0 : C        n0 ⊗ n0 : G = J5cub − J2cub J1iso +    J1 J1       − J1cub J2iso
                                                                       2
         i=1                                                                                                  (B.37)
                                                  1 cub
                                                                          4       
                                                =    I5 − tr Mcub : C − I4cub
                                                  2




                                                               33
   • The invariant I6cub can be expressed as
                             3 iso 4 iso     7 iso 6 9 iso 4 cub 2 iso 3 cub                           3
         I6cub = − J6cub J1iso +J1     J2 −        J1      + J1          J1 − J1            J2 − 2 J1iso J3cub
                             4               24               8                   3
                5 iso 2 iso 2 3 iso 2 iso cub                iso 2 cub      3 iso 2 cub
                                                                                         J5 + J1iso J2iso J3cub
                                                                   
              − J1         J2      − J1       J2 J1 + J1             J4 + J1
                8                     4                                        2
                1       3 1         2        3                1                1 iso 2
              + J2iso − J2iso J1cub − J2iso J4cub + J2iso J5cub −                   J
                4            8                 4                2               12 3
                1              1            1                 1       2
              − J3iso J2cub + J3iso J3cub − J1cub J4cub + J3cub .
                3              2            4                 4
          cub     cub iso       iso 2 cub        iso 3 cub
                                                       J3 + J1iso J2iso J3cub
                                                   
         I6 = − J6 J1 + J1           J4 − 2 J1
                1 iso cub
                                                   2        1                          3    
              +     J2 J5 + J3iso J3cub + 3 J1iso J5cub −            J3iso J2cub + 2 J1iso J2cub
                2                                                 3
                1  iso 3       cub cub      cub 2
                                                     3  iso 4 iso                            2           
              +      J2     − J1 J4 + J3                +       J1    J2 − J2iso J4cub − J1iso J2iso J1cub
                4                                          4
                 1 iso 2 1  iso 2 cub                    4                 2      2      7 iso 6
                                          J1 + 9 J1iso J1cub − 5 J1iso J2iso
                                                          
              −      J3     −       J2                                                     −     J
                12             8                                                              24 1
                                                                                                                (B.38)
This verifies that I1−6
                    cub
                        are invariants of the cubic O group.

(ii) Representation of general invariants in terms of polyconvex invariants
   • We have the trivial relations J1cub = I1cub and J2cub = I2cub .
   • The invariant J3cub can be expressed as

                                      J3cub = I1iso I1cub − I1iso I2iso + C : Mcub : G .                      (B.39)

   • The invariant J4cub can be expressed as
                                2             2                                 2
                    J4cub = I1iso I1cub − 2 I1iso I2iso + 2I1iso C : Mcub : G + I2iso + I4cub .               (B.40)


   • The invariant J5cub can be expressed as
                                                             3 h            i2 h            i
                                                                 (i)  (i)         (i)  (i)
                                                             X
                       J5cub = I1iso I2cub − I2iso I1cub +      n0 ⊗ n0 : C      n0 ⊗ n0 : G .                (B.41)
                                                             i=1


   • The invariant J6cub can be expressed as

                                                            3 h             i2 h           i
                       2                                    X    (i)  (i)        (i)  (i)
          J6cub = I1iso I2cub − I2iso C : Mcub : G + 2 I1iso     n0 ⊗ n0 : C     n0 ⊗ n0 : G
                                                                   i=1
                                    1  iso cub          2     1              2             
               − I1iso I2iso I1cub +    3I3 I1 − I1iso I3iso +        3I1iso I2iso + I1iso I4cub
                                     2                              4
                                                      3 h
                        "
                   1                                                    i2 h                  i
                                                            (i)  (i)          (i)    (i)
                                                     X
               + iso − I3iso I2cub − I6cub − I2iso        n0 ⊗ n0 : C       n0 ⊗ n0 : G                       (B.42)
                 I1                                  i=1
                 1  iso cub  iso 3                             1                    2
               +      3I2 I4 − I2            + 3I3 C : Mcub : G +
                                                 iso
                                                                           C : Mcub : G
                 2                                        #           4
                                                        
                           2               2
               + I2iso I1cub − 3 I3iso − I1cub I4cub
                                        



The invariants I1−6
                 cub
                      and I1−3
                            iso
                                can represent J1−6
                                                 cub
                                                      and J1−3iso
                                                                  , see also App. B.1. Thereby, I1−5cub
                                                                                                         can be
formulated as polynomials of I1−5 and I1−3 . However, the representation of J6 in terms of I1−6
                                 cub      iso                                        cub                cub
                                                                                                            and
 iso
I1−3 is not a polynomial, as it includes a division by I1iso , cf. Eq. (B.42). Thus, I1−6
                                                                                       cub
                                                                                           and I1−3
                                                                                                iso
                                                                                                     form only
a functional basis but not an integrity basis for the cubic O group. Note that I1iso > 0, which means that
Eq. (B.42) is well-defined.


                                                              34
References
Abbasi, A., M. Ricci, P. Carrara, M. Flaschel, S. Kumar, S. Marfia and L. De Lorenzis (2026). “Discovery of hyperelastic
    constitutive laws from experimental data with EUCLID”. In: Exp. Mech. doi: 10.1007/s11340-026-01290-6.
Aggarwal, C. C. (2018). Neural Networks and Deep Learning. 1st ed. Springer International Publishing.
Aldakheel, F., E. S. Elsayed, Y. Heider and O. Weeger (2025). “Physics-based machine learning for computational fracture
    mechanics”. In: Machine Learn. Comput. Sci. Eng. 1, p. 18. doi: 10.1007/s44379-025-00019-x.
Amos, B., L. Xu and J. Z. Kolter (2017). “Input convex neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the 34th International Con-
    ference on Machine Learning. Ed. by D. Precup and Y. W. Teh. Vol. 70. PMLR, pp. 146–155. arXiv: 1609.07152.
As’ad, F., P. Avery and C. Farhat (2022). “A mechanics-informed artificial neural network approach in data-driven consti-
    tutive modeling”. In: Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 123.12, pp. 2738–2759. doi: 10.1002/nme.6957.
As’ad, F. and C. Farhat (2023). “A mechanics-informed deep learning framework for data-driven nonlinear viscoelasticity”.
    In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 417, p. 116463. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2023.116463.
Ball, J. M. (1976). “Convexity conditions and existence theorems in nonlinear elasticity”. In: Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal.
    63.4, pp. 337–403. doi: 10.1007/BF00279992.
Ball, J. M. (1977). “Constitutive inequalities and existence theorems in nonlinear elasto-statics”. In: Herriot Watt Symposion:
    Nonlinear Analysis and Mechanics. Ed. by R. Knops. Vol. 1. London: Pitman, pp. 187–241.
Ball, J. M. (2002). “Some open problems in elasticity”. In: Geometry, Mechanics, and Dynamics. Ed. by P. Newton, P.
    Holmes and A. Weinstein. New York: Springer-Verlag, pp. 3–59. doi: 10.1007/0-387-21791-6_1.
Bertoldi, K. and M. Gei (2011). “Instabilities in multilayered soft dielectrics”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 59 (1), pp. 18–42.
    doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2010.10.001.
Betsch, P., A. Janz and C. Hesch (2018). “A mixed variational framework for the design of energy-momentum schemes
    inspired by the structure of polyconvex stored energy functions”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 335, pp. 660–
    696. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2018.01.013.
Boehler, J. P. (1977). “On irreducible representations for isotropic scalar functions”. In: Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 57.6,
    pp. 323–327. doi: 10.1002/zamm.19770570608.
Boes, B., J.-W. Simon and H. Holthusen (2026). “Accounting for plasticity: An extension of inelastic constitutive artificial
    neural networks”. In: Eur. J. Mech. A/Solids 117, p. 105998. doi: 10.1016/j.euromechsol.2025.105998.
Bonet, J., A. J. Gil and R. Ortigosa (2015). “A computational framework for polyconvex large strain elasticity”. In: Comput.
    Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 283, pp. 1061–1094. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2014.10.002.
Bonet, J. and R. D. Wood (2008). Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics for Finite Element Analysis. 2nd ed. Cambridge
    University Press.
Chen, Y., Y. Shi and B. Zhang (2019). “Optimal control via neural networks: A convex approach”. In: Pre-print under
    review. arXiv: 1805.11835.
Ciarlet, P. G. (1988). Mathematical Elasticity Volume I: Three-Dimensional Elasticity. Studies in Mathematics and Its
    Applications. Elsevier. doi: 10.1016/S0168-2024(08)70061-4.
Czarnecki, W. M., S. Osindero, M. Jaderberg, G. Swirszcz and R. Pascanu (2017). “Sobolev training for neural networks”.
    In: 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Derksen, H. and G. Kemper (2015). Computational Invariant Theory. 2nd ed. Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences.
    Springer Berlin, Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-48422-7.
Ebbing, V. (2010). “Design of Polyconvex Energy Functions for All Anisotropy Classes”. PhD thesis. Universität Duisburg-
    Essen.
Ehret, A. and M. Itskov (2007). “A polyconvex hyperelastic model for fiber-reinforced materials in application to soft
    tissues”. In: J. Mater. Sci. 42, pp. 8853–8863. doi: 10.1007/s10853-007-1812-6.
Ellmer, N., R. Ortigosa, J. Martínez-Frutos and A. J. Gil (2024). “Gradient enhanced Gaussian process regression for
    constitutive modelling in finite strain hyperelasticity”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 418, p. 116547. doi:
    10.1016/j.cma.2023.116547.
Ellmer, N., R. Ortigosa, J. Martínez-Frutos, R. Poya, J. Sienz and A. J. Gil (2026). “Stretch-based hyperelastic electrome-
    chanical constitutive metamodels via gradient enhanced Gaussian predictors using hierarchical structure discovery”. In:
    Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 448, p. 118349.
Fernández, M., M. Jamshidian, T. Böhlke, K. Kersting and O. Weeger (2021). “Anisotropic hyperelastic constitutive mod-
    els for finite deformations combining material theory and data-driven approaches with application to cubic lattice
    metamaterials”. In: Comput. Mech. 67.2, pp. 653–677. doi: 10.1007/s00466-020-01954-7.
Flaschel, M., S. Kumar and L. De Lorenzis (2021). “Unsupervised discovery of interpretable hyperelastic constitutive laws”.
    In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 381, p. 113852. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2021.113852.
Flaschel, M., D. Martonová, C. Veil and E. Kuhl (2026). “Material Fingerprinting: A shortcut to material model discovery
    without solving optimization problems”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 450, p. 118573. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.
    2025.118573.
Franke, M., D. K. Klein, O. Weeger and P. Betsch (2023). “Advanced discretization techniques for hyperelastic physics-
    augmented neural networks”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 416, p. 116333. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2023.116333.
Frankel, A. L., R. E. Jones and L. P. Swiler (2020). “Tensor basis Gaussian process models of hyperelastic materials”. In:
    Journal of Machine Learning for Modeling and Computing 1.1. doi: 10.1615/.2020033325.
Fuhg, J. N., N. Bouklas and R. E. Jones (2022). “Learning hyperelastic anisotropy from data via a tensor basis neural
    network”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 168, p. 105022. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2022.105022.
Fuhg, J. N., A. Jadoon, O. Weeger, D. T. Seidl and R. E. Jones (2024). “Polyconvex neural network models of thermoelas-
    ticity”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 192, p. 105837. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2024.105837.
Gärtner, T., M. Fernández and O. Weeger (2021). “Nonlinear multiscale simulation of elastic beam lattices with anisotropic
    homogenized constitutive models based on artificial neural networks”. In: Comput. Mech. 68. doi: 10.1007/s00466-
    021-02061-x.
Geuken, G.-L., P. Kurzeja, D. Wiedemann, M. Zlatić, M. Čanađija and J. Mosler (2026). “Modeling isotropic polyconvex
    hyperelasticity by neural networks – Sufficient and necessary criteria for compressible and incompressible materials”.
    In: Pre-print under review. arXiv: 2603.27351.




                                                              35
Geuken, G.-L., P. Kurzeja, D. Wiedemann and J. Mosler (2025). “A novel neural network for isotropic polyconvex hyper-
    elasticity satisfying the universal approximation theorem”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 203, p. 106209. doi: 10.1016/j.
    jmps.2025.106209.
Gil, A. J. and R. Ortigosa (2016). “A new framework for large strain electromechanics based on convex multi-variable
    strain energies: Variational formulation and material characterisation”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 302,
    pp. 293–328. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2015.11.036.
Hartmann, S. and P. Neff (2003). “Polyconvexity of generalized polynomial-type hyperelastic strain energy functions for
    near-incompressibility”. In: Int. J. Solids Struct. 40, pp. 2767–2791. doi: 10.1016/S0020-7683(03)00086-6.
Haupt, P. (2002). Continuum Mechanics and Theory of Materials. 2nd ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Haussler, D. (1988). “Quantifying inductive bias: AI learning algorithms and Valiant’s learning framework”. In: Artif. Intell.
    36.2, pp. 177–221. doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(88)90002-1.
Herrmann, L., M. Jokeit, O. Weeger and S. Kollmannsberger (2025). Deep Learning in Computational Mechanics - An
    Introductory Course. 2nd ed. Springer Cham. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-89529-6.
Holthusen, H., K. Linka, E. Kuhl and T. Brepols (2026). “A generalized dual potential for inelastic Constitutive Artificial
    Neural Networks: A JAX implementation at finite strains”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 206, p. 106337. doi: 10.1016/j.
    jmps.2025.106337.
Holzapfel, G. A. (2000). Nonlinear Solid Mechanics: A Continuum Approach for Engineering. 2nd ed. Wiley.
Horn, R. and C. Johnson (2013). Matrix Analysis. 2nd ed. USA: Cambridge University Press.
Hornik, K. (1991). “Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward networks”. In: Neural Netw. 4.2, pp. 251–257. doi:
    10.1016/0893-6080(91)90009-T.
Hossain, M. and P. Steinmann (2013). “More hyperelastic models for rubber-like materials: Consistent tangent operators
    and comparative study”. In: J. Mech. Behav. Mater. 22.1–2, pp. 27–50. doi: 10.1515/jmbm-2012-0007.
Itskov, M. (2015). Tensor Algebra and Tensor Analysis for Engineers. 4th ed. Springer Cham. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
    16342-0.
Itskov, M. and N. Aksel (2004). “A class of orthotropic and transversely isotropic hyperelastic constitutive models based on a
    polyconvex strain energy function”. In: Int. J. Solids Struct. 41, pp. 3833–3848. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2004.02.027.
Jadoon, A. A., D. T. Seidl, R. E. Jones and J. N. Fuhg (2026). “Input specific neural networks”. In: Comput. Mech. doi:
    10.1007/s00466-025-02737-8.
Kalina, K. A., L. Linden, J. Brummund and M. Kästner (2023). “FEANN: An efficient data-driven multiscale approach
    based on physics-constrained neural networks and automated data mining”. In: Comput. Mech. doi: 10.1007/s00466-
    022-02260-0.
Kalina, K. A., L. Linden, J. Brummund, P. Metsch and M. Kästner (2022). “Automated constitutive modeling of isotropic
    hyperelasticity based on artificial neural networks”. In: Comput. Mech. 69, pp. 1–20. doi: 10.1007/s00466-021-02090-6.
Kalina, K. A., J. Brummund and M. Kästner (2026). “A physics-augmented neural network framework for finite strain
    incompressible viscoelasticity”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 455, p. 118892. doi: 10 .1016/j .cma.2026 .
    118892.
Kalina, K. A., J. Brummund, W. Sun and M. Kästner (2025). “Neural networks meet anisotropic hyperelasticity: A frame-
    work based on generalized structure tensors and isotropic tensor functions”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng.
    437, p. 117725. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2024.117725.
Kalina, K. A., P. Gebhart, J. Brummund, L. Linden, W. Sun and M. Kästner (2024). “Neural network-based multiscale
    modeling of finite strain magneto-elasticity with relaxed convexity criteria”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng.
    421, p. 116739. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2023.116739.
Kambouchev, N., J. Fernandez and R. Radovitzky (2007). “A polyconvex model for materials with cubic symmetry”. In:
    Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 15, p. 451. doi: 10.1088/0965-0393/15/5/006.
Kannapinn, M., M. Schäfer and O. Weeger (2024). “TwinLab: A framework for data-efficient training of non-intrusive
    reduced-order models for digital twins”. In: Eng. Comput. doi: 10.1108/EC-11-2023-0855.
Karniadakis, G. E., I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang and L. Yang (2021). “Physics-informed machine learning”.
    In: Nat. Rev. Phys. doi: 10.1038/s42254-021-00314-5.
Klein, D. K., M. Fernández, R. J. Martin, P. Neff and O. Weeger (2022a). “Polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity with
    neural networks”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 159, p. 104703. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2021.104703.
Klein, D. K., H. Mokarram, K. Kikinov, M. Kannapinn, S. Rudykh and A. J. Gil (2026a). “Neural networks meet hyperelas-
    ticity: A monotonic approach”. In: Eur. J. Mech., A/Solids 116, p. 105900. doi: 10.1016/j.euromechsol.2025.105900.
Klein, D. K. (2025). “Polyconvex Hyperelasticity with Neural Networks: On Invariant- and Coordinate-Based Models,
    Benefits and Limitations”. PhD thesis. TU Darmstadt.
Klein, D. K., R. Ortigosa, J. Martínez-Frutos and O. Weeger (2022b). “Finite electro-elasticity with physics-augmented
    neural networks”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 400, p. 115501. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2022.115501.
Klein, D. K., R. Ortigosa, J. Martínez-Frutos and O. Weeger (2024). “Nonlinear electro-elastic finite element analysis with
    neural network constitutive models”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 425, p. 116910. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2024.
    116910.
Klein, D. K., R. Ortigosa, H. T. Roth, K. A. Kalina, J. Martínez-Frutos, M. Kästner and O. Weeger (2026b). “On limitations
    of polyconvexity”. In: Pre-print under review.
Klein, D. K., F. J. Roth, I. Valizadeh and O. Weeger (2023). “Parametrized polyconvex hyperelasticity with physics-
    augmented neural networks”. In: Data-Centric Eng. 4, e25. doi: 10.1017/dce.2023.21.
Kumar, S. and D. M. Kochmann (2022). “What machine learning can do for computational solid mechanics”. In: Current
    Trends and Open Problems in Computational Mechanics. Ed. by F. Aldakheel, B. Hudobivnik, M. Soleimani, H. Wessels,
    C. Weißenfels and M. Marino. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 275–285. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-87312-
    7_27.
Linden, L., D. K. Klein, K. A. Kalina, J. Brummund, O. Weeger and M. Kästner (2023). “Neural networks meet hyperelas-
    ticity: A guide for enforcing physics”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 179, p. 105363. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2023.105363.
Linka, K., M. Hillgärtner, K. Abdolazizi, R. Aydin, M. Itskov and C. Cyron (2020). “Constitutive artificial neural networks:
    A fast and general approach to predictive data-driven constitutive modeling by deep learning”. In: J. Comput. Phys.,
    p. 110010. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2020.110010.




                                                             36
Masi, F. and I. Stefanou (2022a). “Multiscale modeling of inelastic materials with thermodynamics-based artificial neural
    networks (TANN)”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 398, p. 115190. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2022.115190.
Masi, F. and I. Stefanou (2022b). “Multiscale modeling of inelastic materials with thermodynamics-based artificial neural
    networks (TANN)”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 398, p. 115190. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2022.115190.
McCulloch, J. A., S. R. St. Pierre, K. Linka and E. Kuhl (2024). “On sparse regression, L-regularization, and automated
    model discovery”. In: Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 125.14, e7481. doi: 10.1002/nme.7481.
Merodio, J. and P. Neff (2006). “A note on tensile instabilities and loss of ellipticity for a fiber-reinforced nonlinearly elastic
    solid”. In: Arch. Mech. 58, pp. 293–303.
Müller, S., T. Qi and B. Yan (1994). “On a new class of elastic deformations not allowing for cavitation”. In: Ann. Inst.
    Henri Poincare (C) Anal. Non Lineaire 11.2, pp. 217–243. doi: 10.1016/s0294-1449(16)30193-7.
Neff, P., I.-D. Ghiba and J. Lankeit (2015). “The exponentiated Hencky-logarithmic strain energy. Part I: Constitutive
    issues and rank-one convexity”. In: J. Elast. 121, pp. 143–234. doi: 10.1007/s10659-015-9524-7.
Olive, M., B. Kolev, R. Desmorat and B. Desmorat (2022). “Characterization of the symmetry class of an elasticity tensor
    using polynomial covariants”. In: Math. Mech. Solids 27 (1), pp. 144–190. doi: 10.1177/10812865211010885.
Ortigosa, R., J. Martínez-Frutos, A. Pérez-Escolar, I. Castañar, N. Ellmer and A. Gil (2025). “A generalized theory for
    physics-augmented neural networks in finite strain thermo-electro-mechanics”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng.
    437, p. 117741. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2025.117741.
Ortigosa, R. and A. J. Gil (2016). “A new framework for large strain electromechanics based on convex multi-variable strain
    energies: Conservation laws, hyperbolicity and extension to electro-magneto-mechanics”. In: Comput. Methods Appl.
    Mech. Eng. 309, pp. 202–242. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2016.05.019.
Peirlinck, M., K. Linka, J. A. Hurtado, G. A. Holzapfel and E. Kuhl (2025). “Democratizing biomedical simulation through
    automated model discovery and a universal material subroutine”. In: Comput. Mech. 75.6, pp. 1703–1723. doi: 10.1007/
    s00466-024-02515-y.
Peng, G. C. Y., M. Alber, A. Buganza Tepole, W. R. Cannon, S. De, S. Dura-Bernal, K. Garikipati, G. Karniadakis,
    W. W. Lytton, P. Perdikaris, L. Petzold and E. Kuhl (2021). “Multiscale modeling meets machine learning: What can
    we learn?” In: Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 28.3, pp. 1017–1037. doi: 10.1007/s11831-020-09405-5.
Poya, R., R. Ortigosa, A. J. Gil, T. Kim and J. Bonet (2025). “Generalised tangent stabilised nonlinear elasticity: An
    automated framework for controlling material and geometric instabilities”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 436,
    p. 117701. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2024.117701.
Ricker, A. and P. Wriggers (2023). “Systematic fitting and comparison of hyperelastic continuum models for elastomers”.
    In: Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 30.3, pp. 2257–2288. doi: 10.1007/s11831-022-09865-x.
Riemer, B. M., J. Brummund, K. A. Kalina, A. H. G. Milor, F. Dammaß and M. Kästner (2025). “Construction of irreducible
    integrity basis for anisotropic hyperelasticity via structural tensors”. In: Pre-print under review. arXiv: 2512.04014.
Rudykh, S. and G. deBotton (2012). “Instabilities of hyperelastic fiber composites: Micromechanical versus numerical
    analyses”. In: J. Elast. 106.2, pp. 123–147. doi: 10.1007/s10659-011-9313-x.
Schröder, J. (2010). “Anisotropic polyconvex energies”. In: Poly-, Quasi- and Rank-One Convexity in Applied Mechanics.
    Ed. by J. Schröder and P. Neff. CISM International Centre for Mechanical Sciences. Vienna: Springer, pp. 53–105. doi:
    10.1007/978-3-7091-0174-2_3.
Schröder, J. and P. Neff (2003). “Invariant formulation of hyperelastic transverse isotropy based on polyconvex free energy
    functions”. In: Int. J. Solids Struct. 40, pp. 401–445. doi: 10.1016/S0020-7683(02)00458-4.
Schröder, J., P. Neff and D. Balzani (2005). “A variational approach for materially stable anisotropic hyperelasticity”. In:
    Int. J. Solids Struct. 42.15, pp. 4352–4371. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2004.11.021.
Schröder, J., P. Neff and V. Ebbing (2008). “Anisotropic polyconvex energies on the basis of crystallographic motivated
    structural tensors”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 56.12, pp. 3486–3506. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2008.08.008.
Schröder, J., P. Neff and V. Ebbing (2010). “Polyconvex energies for trigonal, tetragonal and cubic symmetry groups”.
    In: IUTAM Symposium on Variational Concepts with Applications to the Mechanics of Materials. Ed. by K. Hackl.
    Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 221–232.
Schröder, J., P. Wriggers and D. Balzani (2011). “A new mixed finite element based on different approximations of the
    minors of deformation tensors”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 200.49–52, pp. 3583–3600. doi: 10.1016/j.
    cma.2011.08.009.
Silhavy, M. (2014). The Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Continuous Media. 1st ed. Theoretical and Mathematical
    Physics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Silhavy, M. (2018). “A variational approach to nonlinear electro-magneto-elasticity: Convexity conditions and existence
    theorems”. In: Math. Mech. Solids 23.6, pp. 907–928. doi: 10.1177/1081286517696536.
Smith, G. F. (1962). “Further results on the strain-energy function for anisotropic elastic materials”. In: Archive for Rational
    Mechanics and Analysis 10, pp. 108–118. doi: 10.1007/BF00281180.
Spencer, A. J. M. (1971). “Theory of invariants”. In: Continuum Physics. Ed. by A. C. Eringen. New York: Academic Press,
    pp. 239–353.
St. Pierre, S. R., D. Rajasekharan, E. C. Darwin, K. Linka, M. E. Levenston and E. Kuhl (2023). “Discovering the mechanics
    of artificial and real meat”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 415, p. 116236. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2023.116236.
Steinmann, P., M. Hossain and G. Possart (2012). “Hyperelastic models for rubber-like materials: Consistent tangent
    operators and suitability for Treloar’s data”. In: Arch. Appl. Mech. 82.9, pp. 1183–1217. doi: 10.1007/s00419- 012-
    0610-z.
Taç, V., F. Sahli Costabal and A. B. Tepole (2022). “Data-driven tissue mechanics with polyconvex neural ordinary differ-
    ential equations”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 398, p. 115248. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2022.115248.
Truesdell, C. and W. Noll (2004). The Non-Linear Field Theories of Mechanics. 3rd ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Vijayakumaran, H., J. B. Russ, G. H. Paulino and M. A. Bessa (2024). “Consistent machine learning for topology opti-
    mization with microstructure-dependent neural network material models”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids, p. 106015. doi:
    10.1016/j.jmps.2024.106015.
Vlassis, N. N. and W. C. Sun (2021). “Sobolev training of thermodynamic-informed neural networks for interpretable elasto-
    plasticity models with level set hardening”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 377, p. 113695. doi: 10.1016/j.
    cma.2021.113695.




                                                                37
Von Rueden, L., S. Mayer, K. Beckh, B. Georgiev, S. Giesselbach, R. Heese, B. Kirsch, M. Walczak, J. Pfrommer, A. Pick, R.
    Ramamurthy, J. Garcke, C. Bauckhage and J. Schuecker (2021). “Informed machine learning – A taxonomy and survey
    of integrating prior knowledge into learning systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
    pp. 614–633. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3079836.
Wiedemann, D. and M. A. Peter (2023). “Characterization of polyconvex isotropic functions”. In: Pre-print under review.
    arXiv: 2304.08385.
Wiesheier, S., M. A. Moreno-Mateos and P. Steinmann (2024). “Versatile data-adaptive hyperelastic energy functions for
    soft materials”. In: Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 430, p. 117208. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2024.117208.
Wollner, M. P., D. K. Klein, H. Baaser, G. A. Holzapfel and P. Neff (2026a). “Concurrent enforcement of polyconvex-
    ity and true-stress-true-strain monotonicity in incompressible isotropic hyperelasticity: Application to neural network
    constitutive models”. In: Pre-print under review. arXiv: 2605.20031.
Wollner, M. P., G. A. Holzapfel and P. Neff (2026b). “In search of constitutive conditions in isotropic hyperelasticity:
    Polyconvexity versus true-stress-true-strain monotonicity”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 209, p. 106465. doi: 10.1016/j.
    jmps.2025.106465.
Xiao, H. (1996). “On isotropic extension of anisotropic tensor functions”. In: Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 76, pp. 205–214.
Yang Gao, D., P. Neff, I. Roventa and C. Thiel (2017). “On the convexity of nonlinear elastic energies in the right Cauchy-
    Green tensor”. In: J. Elast. 127, pp. 303–308. doi: 10.1007/s10659-016-9601-6.
Zee, L. and E. R. Sternberg (1983). “Ordinary and strong ellipticity in the equilibrium theory of incompressible hyperelastic
    solids”. In: Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 83, pp. 53–90. doi: 10.1007/BF00281087.
Zheng, L., D. M. Kochmann and S. Kumar (2024). “HyperCAN: Hypernetwork-driven deep parameterized constitutive
    models for metamaterials”. In: Extreme Mech. Lett. 72, p. 102243. doi: 10.1016/j.eml.2024.102243.
Zheng, Q.-S. and A. Spencer (1993). “Tensors which characterize anisotropies”. In: Int. J. Eng. Sci. 31.5, pp. 679–693. doi:
    10.1016/0020-7225(93)90118-E.
Zlatić, M. and M. Čanađija (2024). “Recovering Mullins damage hyperelastic behaviour with physics augmented neural
    networks”. In: J. Mech. Phys. Solids 193, p. 105839. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2024.105839.




                                                             38
