                                                          SPARSE POD MODE SELECTION AND MANIFOLD
                                                      DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION WITH NEURAL NETWORKS∗
                                                   TOMOKI KOIKE† , PRAKASH MOHAN‡ , MARC T. HENRY DE FRAHAN‡ , ELIZABETH
                                                                          QIAN† , AND JULIE BESSAC‡

                                                       Abstract. Linear dimensionality reduction methods such as proper orthogonal decomposition
                                                   (POD) make high-dimensional data amenable to analysis by identifying the principal components,
                                                   or modes, that capture the most variance, or energy, in the data and constructing a low-dimensional
                                                   representation in the subspace they span. Such linear methods struggle, however, for data with
                                                   slowly decaying Kolmogorov n-widths, such as advection-dominated and turbulent flows, which re-
arXiv:2605.27756v2 [physics.flu-dyn] 30 Jun 2026




                                                   quire many modes for accurate reconstruction; moreover, energy-based truncation can discard low-
                                                   energy modes needed to capture small-scale features. Recent nonlinear manifold methods using
                                                   polynomial mappings with alternating or greedy mode selection achieve better reconstruction with
                                                   fewer modes, but fix the form of the nonlinear mapping a priori, limiting expressivity. In contrast,
                                                   neural network (NN) manifolds offer greater expressivity yet employ energy-based selection. We
                                                   present SparseModesNet, a dimensionality reduction framework that employs linear encoding and
                                                   nonlinear NN decoding. The decoder leverages LassoNet, a method enforcing hierarchical sparsity
                                                   through a residual connection with a linear skip layer, to simultaneously select informative modes and
                                                   learn a nonlinear mapping that minimizes reconstruction error. On benchmark advection-dominated
                                                   and chaotic flows, SparseModesNet matches or exceeds state-of-the-art performance. For turbulent
                                                   channel flow at friction Reynolds number Reτ = 5200, our method reduces reconstruction error
                                                   by 51–78% compared to existing polynomial manifold methods while maintaining interpretability
                                                   through physically meaningful mode selection.

                                                       Key words. proper orthogonal decomposition, neural network, autoencoder, sparsity-inducing
                                                   regression

                                                      MSC codes. 15A18, 57Z20, 65F55, 65Z05, 68T07, 76F99


                                                        1. Introduction. High-dimensional data are ubiquitous in computational sci-
                                                   ence and engineering, arising from numerical simulations of partial differential equa-
                                                   tions (PDEs) as well as from experiments and observations, and are frequently too
                                                   large to analyze, store, or process directly. Dimensionality reduction addresses this
                                                   challenge by constructing a low-dimensional representation that preserves the essential
                                                   structure of the data and enables efficient downstream tasks such as inverse problems,
                                                   control, and optimization [7, 52, 41, 2]. The most widely used methods are linear.
                                                   For example, Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) and Principal Component
                                                   Analysis (PCA) computes via Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) an orthonormal
                                                   set of modes ordered by the variance, or energy, onto which the data can be projected
                                                   to yield a low-dimensional representation [8, 34, 57].
                                                        However, POD’s limitation to linear subspaces causes it to underperform for
                                                   transport-dominated, advection-dominated, or turbulent systems. In such cases, slow
                                                   spectral decay, known as the Kolmogorov n-width barrier, requires retaining prohib-
                                                   itively many modes for accuracy, undermining dimensionality reduction [18]. Recent
                                                   work has proposed addressing this barrier by moving beyond linear subspaces to non-
                                                   linear manifolds that allow nonlinear combinations of modes [1, 49].

                                                      ∗ Submitted to the editors July 1, 2026.

                                                        Funding: The authors were supported by the Department of Energy Office of Science Advanced
                                                   Scientific Computing Research, DOE Award DE-SC0024721.
                                                      † School of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA ({tkoike,

                                                   eqian}@gatech.edu)
                                                      ‡ Computational Science Center, National Laboratory of the Rockies (NLR), Golden, CO

                                                   ({julie.bessac}@nlr.gov)
                                                                                                     1
2            T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


     Some researchers have explored nonlinear manifolds that augment linear POD
subspaces with quadratic [51, 70, 36, 58] or higher-order polynomial mappings [26].
These approaches have successfully demonstrated the potential to overcome the Kol-
mogorov barrier with fewer modes. However, they rely on heuristic energy-based
mode selection, where modes are ordered by energy retention and then truncated at
fixed thresholds. This selection can be suboptimal since low-energy modes may be
critical to capture dynamics such as energy dissipation in turbulent flows [4, 12].
     In [26, 27], the authors define a polynomial mapping that decodes a reduced rep-
resentation and optimize both the linear basis and polynomial coefficients through an
alternating minimization scheme, while [61] proposes a greedy algorithm that itera-
tively selects modes based on their contribution to reducing state reconstruction error,
later extended to sparse data in [59]. While advancing beyond energy-based trunca-
tion, these methods face two limitations. First, to accurately capture increasingly
complex physics requires higher-degree polynomials; including all cross-terms among
the reduced variables then incurs combinatorial growth in the number of coefficients,
creating a tradeoff between expressivity and computational tractability. Second, mode
selection is performed separately from the mapping optimization rather than jointly,
which may yield suboptimal mode-mapping combinations. Importantly, while the
polynomial coefficients are optimized, the form of the mapping (e.g., quadratic) is
prescribed a priori rather than learned from data, which limits expressivity.
     Neural networks (NNs) offer an alternative to overcoming the Kolmogorov n-
width barrier by learning nonlinear manifold representations directly from data. A
prevalent architecture is the autoencoder (AE), which consists of an encoder that com-
presses high-dimensional states into a low-dimensional latent representation and a de-
coder that reconstructs the original state from this representation. Unlike polynomial
mappings with predetermined functional forms, AEs learn both the compression and
reconstruction mappings from data, enabling greater flexibility in capturing complex
nonlinear structure. The work [43] first applied deep convolutional AEs to construct
trial manifolds for model order reduction (MOR), demonstrating improved reconstruc-
tion over linear methods for advection-dominated problems. Subsequent developments
have extended this framework in several directions: [56] incorporates hyper-reduction
techniques to lower online computational costs, [67] generalizes convolutional archi-
tectures to unstructured meshes common in finite element discretizations, and [14]
introduces adaptive decoder filters that evolve with the latent state. Despite these
advances, AE-based methods encode information into latent variables that lack direct
physical meaning, defying interpretability of the learned representations.
     Interpretability can be considered the ability to understand which physical fea-
tures or modes the reduced model captures and how they contribute to the reconstruc-
tion [15]. Several works have pursued this goal by imposing structure on the learned
latent space according to physical considerations: [37] employs self-supervised learn-
ing to produce embeddings distinguishable according to physical parameters, [64] uses
β-variational AEs to learn disentangled, near-orthogonal latent variables, and [71] en-
codes frequency information to yield latents corresponding to distinct temporal scales.
While these methods endow the latent space with meaningful structure, the resulting
representations remain dense—all latent coordinates contribute to every reconstruc-
tion, making it difficult to isolate which modes are essential for a given state. A
complementary principle from interpretable machine learning is that sparsity, the use
of fewer active features, enhances interpretability by enabling direct examination of
individual contributions [66]. Sparse representations that activate only a subset of
modes would allow practitioners to identify precisely which physical structures are
                      SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                              3

necessary for accurate reconstruction.
     This work bridges interpretable nonlinear manifolds with sparse mode selection
and expressive NN decoders. We adapt LassoNet [44], a framework enforcing hierar-
chical feature sparsity where features participate in NNs only if corresponding linear
skip weights are active, to transform the combinatorial mode selection problem into
a continuous regularization path promoting sparsity during NN training. While Las-
soNet remains underexplored in scientific computing beyond limited applications such
as physics-informed neural networks for inverse problems [45], we demonstrate its ef-
ficacy for mode selection with a NN decoder, enabling automated, scalable selection
of minimal sets of physically interpretable modes while leveraging NN expressivity.
     The contributions of this work are:
       • We propose SparseModesNet, a novel framework that combines the inter-
         pretability of POD modes with NN expressivity, enabling sparse mode selec-
         tion during NN training.
       • We show SparseModesNet’s effectiveness on dynamical data with slowly de-
         caying Kolmogorov n-widths, including turbulent channel flow, showcasing its
         ability to select minimal mode sets while maintaining high state and mode
         reconstruction accuracy.
       • We analyze the interpretability of our NN decoder by computing modes of the
         reconstructed data and provide physical insights into selected modes based
         on their order and characteristics.
     Several recent works have also combined NN expressivity with physically mean-
ingful POD bases for interpretable nonlinear decoders. For example, [20, 6] employ
small linear POD basis augmented with NN correction terms, preserving interpretabil-
ity while harnessing nonlinear expressivity. The authors of [65] extend this approach
by applying NN corrections to both encoder and decoder, each weighted with trainable
coefficients for improved fitting. Alternatively, some works augment linear reduction
with nonlinear manifolds derived from probabilistic embeddings [29], user-defined re-
producing kernel Hilbert spaces [21], or Gaussian processes [3]. Although these hybrid
approaches maintain physical interpretability and sparsity by selecting few modes,
they rely on energy-based heuristics rather than simultaneously identifying essential
modes from a candidate set and learning the nonlinear manifold.
     Another related work [19] recently introduced Decomposed Sparse Modal Opti-
mization (DESMO), which leverages the Sparse Identification of Nonlinear Dynamics
(SINDy) framework [11, 13, 25] to discover interpretable governing equations by pro-
moting sparsity in candidate function libraries. DESMO applies SINDy to POD or
AE-learned bases by constructing a nonlinear candidate library from modes using
predefined basis functions and employing ℓ1 -regularization to select the fewest ac-
tive terms. While DESMO promotes sparsity in functional representations of a given
modal basis, our approach identifies which modes themselves should be retained and
simultaneously learns an expressive NN manifold tailored to those selected modes.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews background
on encoder-decoder concepts. Section 3 presents the SparseModesNet framework, de-
tailing LassoNet integration for mode selection and the NN architecture for nonlin-
ear mapping. Section 4 demonstrates SparseModesNet’s performance on benchmark
problems and turbulent channel flow. Finally, Section 5 summarizes our findings and
discusses future directions.

    2. Background. This section covers the necessary background for this work.
In Subsection 2.1, we explain the concepts of encoder-decoder pairs in the context of
4             T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


dynamical systems. In Subsection 2.2, we introduce LassoNet, a NN framework for
sparse feature selection, which we adapt for mode selection in this work.
    2.1. Data Encoder and Decoder on Manifolds.
    2.1.1. Encoder-Decoder for Dimensionality Reduction. Let a data matrix
be X = [x1 , . . . , xn ] ∈ Rd×n whose columns x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd are n high-dimensional
data vectors. The dimension d is typically large, corresponding, for instance, to the
degrees of freedom of a discretized field of a PDE, the resolution of an image, or the
number of recorded measurements.
    Dimensionality reduction seeks a lower-dimensional representation of each data
vector by mapping it to reduced coordinates in a latent space Rr , where r ≪ d.
This mapping is realized by an encoder E : Rd → Rr that compresses x to a latent
variable z = E(x) ∈ Rr , together with a decoder D : Rr → Rd that reconstructs an
approximation of the original vector, x ≈ (D◦E)(x). The quality of this approximation
is measured by the reconstruction error
                                            n
                                         1X
(2.1)                  RE(X; E, D) =           ∥xi − (D ◦ E)(xi )∥22 ,
                                         n i=1

which quantifies the discrepancy between the data points and their reconstructions.
     The simplest encoder-decoder pair is linear. Let X ≈ Us Σs Vs⊤ be the rank-s
SVD of the snapshot matrix, where s ≤ min {d, n}, the matrices Us ∈ Rd×s and
Vs ∈ Rn×s contain the left and right singular vectors, and Σs ∈ Rs×s is the diagonal
matrix of singular values σ1 ≥ · · · ≥ σs > 0. The columns of Us are the POD
modes, which form an orthonormal basis capturing the most energetic features of the
data [8, 34]. A linear encoder-decoder pair selects a subset of r < s modes, indexed
by Ir ⊆ [s] = {1, . . . , s} with cardinality |Ir | = r, and defines E(x) = U⊤r x and
D(z) = Ur z, where Ur ∈ Rd×r contains the selected modes.
     A common selection strategy is the energy heuristic, which retains the leading r
modes corresponding to the largest singular values. By the Eckart-Young theorem [23,
46], this choice minimizes the reconstruction error among all rank-r approximations:
                                     n                        min{d,n}
                                  1X                      1     X
(2.2)              RE(x; Ur ) =         ∥xi − Ur zi ∥22 =                σi2 .
                                  n i=1                   n    i=r+1

The limitation of linear encoder-decoder pairs is that reducing reconstruction error
requires increasing r, which becomes prohibitively expensive for certain data types.
For example, transport-dominated or turbulent physics data with slowly decaying
Kolmogorov n-widths [49]. This motivates the linear encoder and nonlinear decoder
pair, which we introduce in the next section.
     2.1.2. Linear Encoder with Nonlinear Decoder. Data with slowly decay-
ing Kolmogorov n-widths are known to be challenging, especially for linear encoder-
decoder pairs, since reducing reconstruction error requires retaining prohibitively
many modes. To address this limitation, practitioners have proposed retaining the
linear encoder while augmenting the decoder with a nonlinear correction term:

                      z = E(x) = U⊤
                                  r x,          D(z) = Ur z + h(z),

where h : Rr → Rd is a nonlinear function. Here, the r modes forming Ur need not
be the leading modes; they can be any subset of the candidate modes Us . Since the
                       SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                               5

nonlinear correction term h should remain low-dimensional for efficient evaluation,
a natural choice for its input is the reduced representation z. This decoder struc-
ture with polynomial nonlinear mappings was introduced by [51] and has since been
adopted in various model reduction contexts [70, 36, 58, 22, 28, 61].
    As shown in [28, eq. 14], the optimal nonlinear correction term h (in the linear
least-squares sense) maps the reduced representation z to the orthogonal complement
of the subspace spanned by Ur . That is, h captures dynamics not represented by
the selected modes Ur alone, thereby enhancing expressivity beyond what the linear
term provides. However, an arbitrary h may not satisfy this orthogonality condition,
introducing redundancy with the linear term and potentially degrading reconstruction
accuracy. Yet designing h to satisfy orthogonality a priori is nontrivial. To enforce
orthogonality explicitly, many existing works [36, 58, 22, 5, 28, 26, 27, 61] define the
decoder as

(2.3)                           D(z) = Ur z + Wh(z),

where h : Rr → Rp and W ∈ Rd×p satisfies U⊤      r W = 0 for a mapping dimension p.
This formulation augments the linear reconstruction with information in its orthogo-
nal complement through the composition of the nonlinearity h and rotation W.
     A possible choice is W = Uq , where Uq ∈ Rd×q consists of q modes from Us that
are orthogonal to Ur , i.e., Uq ⊆ {Uj : j ∈ [s] \ Ir }. This formulation, adopted in [6,
26, 27, 21], provides a natural interpretation, where h maps the reduced coordinates z
to coefficients of modes orthogonal to those used in the linear reconstruction. However,
this restricts the correction term to the span of modes from the predefined candidate
set Us , which may be insufficient in number. Rather, in this work, we will learn W
from data.
    2.1.3. Linear Encoder with Neural Network Decoder. A key limitation
of the nonlinear decoder in (2.3) is that the functional form of h is typically fixed a
priori (e.g., quadratic polynomials), which restricts expressivity. To overcome this,
we parameterize the nonlinear correction term as a NN, following [6, 65]:

(2.4)              z = E(x) = U⊤
                               r x,       D(z) = Ur z + WhNN (z),

where hNN : Rr → Rp is the NN and W ∈ Rd×p satisfies U⊤         r W = 0 but is not
restricted to columns from Us . The NN learns the nonlinear mapping and weight W
from data, while the linear term projects onto selected modes.
     This formulation requires determining both (i) which modes to include in Ur and
(ii) how to train hNN and W for the nonlinear correction—while ensuring orthogo-
nality between the two terms. Rather than treating mode selection and NN training
as separate problems, we seek a unified framework that jointly optimizes mode selec-
tion and the nonlinear mapping to minimize reconstruction error. In the following
section, we introduce a feature selection method that enables this joint optimization
for NN-based decoders.
    2.2. LassoNet for Feature Selection. LassoNet [44] is a NN framework for
global feature selection that extends feature sparsity from linear models (e.g., Lasso
regression [32]) to deep NNs. While traditional Lasso employs an ℓ1 -penalty to enforce
sparsity on linear weights, LassoNet integrates feature selection into a NN via a linear
skip (or residual) connection inspired by ResNets (residual NNs) [33].
    Network Architecture. Consider an input feature vector ẑ ∈ Rs . Denote a feed-
forward NN gNN (ẑ; W, β) : Rs → Rs with weight parameters W = {W (1) , . . . , W (L) }
6             T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


and bias parameters β = {β (1) , . . . , β (L) } for L layers, which can be expressed as a
composition of layer-wise transformations: gNN (ẑ; W, β) = g (L) ◦ · · · ◦ g (1) (ẑ), where
g (k) (·) = σk (W (k) · +β (k) ) represents the k-th layer with weight matrix W (k) , bias
vector β (k) , and activation function σk (·) applied element-wise. The LassoNet archi-
tecture augments this feed-forward NN with a direct linear skip connection:

(2.5)                LassoNet(ẑ; ω, W, β) = ω ⊙ ẑ + gNN (ẑ; W, β),

where ω ∈ Rs are skip-layer weights, ⊙ denotes element-wise product, and each input
feature ẑj connects to the corresponding output via skip weight ωj . We denote by
   (1)
Wj ∈ Rp1 the j-th column of the first layer weight matrix W (1) ∈ Rp1 ×s , representing
all connections from input feature j to the p1 units in the first hidden layer.
     Objective Function with Hierarchical Constraint. The novelty of LassoNet lies in
its training objective that enforces structured sparsity through
                                                            (1)
(2.6)      min L(ω, W, β) + λ∥ω∥1 ,        subject to   ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj |       ∀j,
          ω,W,β

where L(ω, W, β) is the empirical loss (e.g., reconstruction error RE(x; E, D) defined
in (2.1)), λ ≥ 0 controls sparsity via the ℓ1 -penalty, and M > 0 governs the strength
of the hierarchical constraint linking skip-layer and first hidden-layer weights.
                                                        (1)
     Proposed in [44], this hierarchical constraint ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj | is key for feature
selection. That is, when the ℓ1 -penalty drives a skip-layer weight ωj to zero, this con-
                                                            (1)
straint forces all associated first hidden layer weights Wj to zero as well, completely
eliminating feature j from the network.
     Training via Continuation Strategy. LassoNet employs proximal gradient descent
with a new hierarchical proximal operator that simultaneously enforces the ℓ1 -penalty
and hierarchical constraint (see [44] for optimization details). Critically, rather than
solving (2.6) for a single fixed λ, LassoNet implements a continuation strategy [30, 31]
that solves a sequence of problems with increasing λ values λ1 < λ2 < · · · < λK .
Starting from λ1 ≈ 0 (yielding a dense model), each subsequent problem at λk+1 is
initialized from the solution at λk , following the solution path as λ increases toward
λK . This path-following approach is computationally efficient—each warm-started
subproblem converges faster than solving from scratch—and produces a sequence
of models (i.e., regularization path [48, 24]) with progressively increasing sparsity.
For mode selection, this continuation strategy provides a systematic framework: as λ
increases along the path, modes are sequentially removed from the NN decoder inputs
according to their importance for reconstruction. The sparsest model (fewest modes)
that maintains acceptable reconstruction accuracy can then be selected, yielding an
expressive nonlinear manifold with sparse, physically interpretable input features and
reduced computational cost automatically.
    3. SparseModesNet: Sparse Mode Selecting Neural Network. This sec-
tion presents SparseModesNet, our framework for selecting optimal POD modes dur-
ing nonlinear decoder training. We first formulate the mode selection problem in Sub-
section 3.1. In Subsection 3.2, we show how to restructure the nonlinear decoder into a
ResNet-style architecture incorporating feature sparsity [44]. Subsection 3.3 describes
the training procedure, and Subsection 3.4 discusses implementation details for data
normalization and NN architecture.
     3.1. Mathematical Formulation for Mode Selection. The goal is to se-
lect optimal POD modes by minimizing reconstruction error while training the NN
                       SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                 7

decoder. To select r modes from s candidate modes, let Sr ∈ Rs×r be a column
selector matrix [9, Sec. 7.2] where each column has a single entry of one at the row
corresponding to a selected left singular vector in Us , such that Ur = Us Sr .
     Our NN learns the matrix Sr S⊤  r , which is a diagonal matrix with ones at entries
                                                                 s xi ∈ R and a binary
corresponding to selected r left singular vectors. Define ẑi = U⊤        s
                 s
vector w ∈ {0, 1} with r ones at entries corresponding to selected left singular vectors,
such that diag(w) = Sr S⊤ r ∈R
                                s×s
                                    . The reconstruction error is then

                                 n
                              1X                                         2
(3.1)          RE(x; w) =           xi − Us (w ⊙ ẑi ) − WhNN (w ⊙ ẑi ) 2 .
                              n i=1

Note the NN mapping is now hNN : Rs → Rp since the input ẑi is the full projection
onto all s POD modes, not just the selected r modes. However, ẑi has zeros at rows
corresponding to zero elements of w, ultimately selecting r modes from s candidates.
      The set of nonzero entries in w gives the indices of selected modes, i.e., Ir = {i ∈
[s] : wi = w(i) ̸= 0}. We identify Ir by training the NN to minimize reconstruction
error. To do so, we reformulate the nonlinear decoder as a ResNet-style architecture
incorporating feature sparsity through a linear skip connection, following the LassoNet
framework [44], as discussed in the next section.

     3.2. LassoNet Formulation of the Nonlinear Decoder. To restructure the
nonlinear decoder into a ResNet-style architecture, we first relax the problem to learn
a continuous skip weight vector ω ∈ Rs , allowing more flexible mode selection rather
than learning a restrictive binary vector w. We then minimize the reconstruction
error over the training data while enforcing two critical constraints.
     First, following LassoNet (2.6), we impose an ℓ1 -penalty λ∥ω∥1 on the skip weights
                                                                           (1)
to promote sparsity. This is paired with the hierarchical constraint ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj |
on the first-layer NN weights, ensuring that if a mode is unselected (ωj = 0), all
                                  (1)
associated first-layer weights Wj are also zero, preventing unselected modes from
influencing the nonlinear mapping. Second, we impose an orthogonality constraint
[Us diag(1{ωj ̸=0} (ω))]⊤W = 0 while learning W from data to ensure the linear and
nonlinear decoder components do not interfere, maintaining clear separation of their
contributions as discussed in Subsection 2.1. Here, 1{ωj ̸=0} (ω) is an indicator function
returning 1 if ωj ̸= 0 and 0 otherwise. Hence, the following optimization enables joint
mode selection and NN training:
                             n
                        1X                                         2
                 min          xi − Us (ω ⊙ ẑi ) − WhNN (ω ⊙ ẑi ) 2 + λ∥ω∥1
(3.2)          ω,hNN ,W n
                          i=1
                       (1)                                                   ⊤
        subject to ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj | and [Us diag(1{ωj ̸=0} (ω))] W = 0, ∀j ∈ [s],

where W (1) , M , and λ are equivalent to those in the LassoNet optimization (2.6). To
draw a clear connection to LassoNet, recognize that this decoder closely resembles
the LassoNet architecture (2.5) with a linear skip connection and NN branch:

                    D(ẑ) =       Us (ω ⊙ ẑ)          +   WhNN (ω ⊙ ẑ) .
                                  | {z }                   |   {z      }
                              linear skip connection        neural network


This NN architecture and mode selection mechanism is summarized in Figure 1.
8              T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


     3.2.1. Design Choices and Their Theoretical Justification. SparseMod-
esNet differs from the original LassoNet and simple ℓ1 -regularization in two key re-
spects, each essential for guaranteeing monotonic mode elimination (i.e., eliminated
modes are never reactivated) when training via the continuation strategy.
     Input masking. Unlike the original LassoNet (2.5), which inputs the full feature
vector ẑ to the NN, we employ ω ⊙ ẑ as the NN input such that the unselected modes
are effectively zero. Here, ω remains a trainable parameter optimized via (3.2), while
ω ⊙ ẑ serves as the parametrized input to hNN (·).
     Hierarchical constraint. An alternative approach may be to remove the hierar-
chical constraint and keep only the ℓ1 -penalty, given the latent variable to both the
linear and nonlinear terms of the decoder are already masked with ω.
     The input masking yields gradient severance. The gradient of the loss with respect
                                           (1)
to the first-layer weights satisfies ∂L/∂Wj = 0 whenever ωj = 0. The hierarchical
                (1)                                                      (1)
constraint ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj | complements this by enforcing Wj = 0 whenever ωj =
0. Together, these properties completely sever mode j’s computational path through
the NN. No gradient signal can flow to update the zeroed-out weights, preventing
the reactivation of an eliminated mode. Hence, combining gradient severance with
the hierarchical constraint guarantees monotonic mode elimination. That is, under
mild regularity conditions on the solution path, modes eliminated at regularization
level λk remain eliminated for all subsequent λℓ > λk . This monotonicity ensures that
SparseModesNet produces a stable, nested sequence of active modes, enabling reliable
mode selection. Without both design choices, the nonzero weights may oscillate and
spuriously reactivate previously eliminated modes as λ increases, forcing the network
to repeatedly relearn mode suppression.
     In Section SM2, empirical validations of our design choices are shown through an
ablation study comparing SparseModesNet against variants without input masking
and without the hierarchical constraint, demonstrating how our formulation achieves
lower reconstruction error and more reliable mode selection. However, the monotonic
mode elimination alone does not explain the better selection of modes. Specifically,
we lack the mathematical machinery to explain how our method is less affected by the
spectral bias [53] as we see in our empirical validations; while possible future directions
would be to explore neural tangent kernels (NTKs) [35]. Hence, we postpone the
formal statement and proof of monotonic mode elimination, including the precise
regularity assumptions to Section SM1.

                                                                               selected
                                         z
                                                                                modes
                                                              0                   0


                                                              0                   0
                                 Layer


                                             Layer
                         Layer




     Fig. 1. The SparseModesNet architecture with a linear skip connection (Us (ω⊙ẑ)) and a neural
network branch (WhNN (ω ⊙ ẑ)) forming a residual network. The top right illustrates how the mode
selector zeros out unselected modes via element-wise multiplication (colored cells are nonzero).
                        SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                               9

     3.3. Training the SparseModesNet. SparseModesNet training consists of
two sequential phases, the first employs the continuation strategy from LassoNet [44]
to select modes, and the second retrains the decoder with the selected modes.
     Phase 1: Mode Selection. We solve (3.2) via continuation, incrementally increas-
ing λ ← (1 + ϵ)λ with path multiplier ϵ > 0 to promote sparsity while warm-starting
each subproblem with the previous solution. At each gradient descent iteration, we
apply a proximal gradient step: (i) compute gradients via backpropagation and up-
date all parameters, then (ii) apply the hierarchical proximal operator from [44, Alg. 2]
                               (1)
to enforce the constraint ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj |. To maintain orthogonality between the
linear and nonlinear components, we project W onto the orthogonal complement of
selected modes via W ← W − Us diag(1{ωj ̸=0} (ω))U⊤      s W after each parameter up-
date. This phase terminates when the number of active modes reaches the target r,
yielding the optimal mode selector ω.
     Phase 2: Decoder Retraining. With modes selected, we fix zi = U⊤        r xi ∈ R
                                                                                        r

where Ur = Us Sr ∈ Rd×r contains the r selected POD modes (see Subsection 3.1),
and retrain the decoder from scratch without the ℓ1 -penalty or hierarchical constraint:
                    n
                 1X                            2
           min         xi − Ur zi − WhNN (zi ) 2     subject to   U⊤
                                                                   r W = 0.
          hNN ,W n
                   i=1


Orthogonality is enforced at each iteration via W ← W − Ur (U⊤  r W). Retraining
without the penalty allows more effective learning by removing the downward bias
on parameters [44]. Upon convergence with hNN fixed, we obtain the optimal W by
solving the following linear least-squares problem only once:
                                                              2
(3.3)       W⋆ = arg min X − Ur U⊤            ⊤            2
                                 r X − WhNN (Ur X) F + γ∥W∥F ,
                         W


where hNN (U⊤ r X) ∈ R
                         p×n
                             applies hNN column-wise and γ is the ℓ2 -penalty parameter.
This least-squares solution automatically satisfies the orthogonality constraint [28].
    The complete training procedure is detailed in Algorithms 3.1 and 3.2. Hyperpa-
rameters (r, M, λ0 , ϵ) are selected following recommendations from [44] with problem-
specific tuning during experimentation.

Algorithm 3.1 SparseModesNet Phase 1: Mode Selection
Require: Training data X, Ẑ, basis Us , neural network hNN , target modes r, initial
    λ0 , hierarchy multiplier M , epochs B, path multiplier ϵ > 0
 1: Initialize hNN with parameters (ω, W, β, W) and set λ = λ0 , k = s
 2: while k > r do
 3:   for b = 1, . . . , B do
 4:       Perform proximal gradient step: compute gradients, update parameters, ap-
          ply hierarchical proximal operator to (ω, W (1) )
 5:       Project to orthogonal complement: W ← W − Us diag(1{ωj ̸=0} (ω))U⊤ s W
 6:   end for
 7:   Increment λ ← (1 + ϵ)λ and update k ← |{i ∈ [s] : ωi ̸= 0}|
 8: end while
 9: return mode selector ω, decoder parameters (W, β, W)



    3.4. Additional Implementation Details.
10             T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


Algorithm 3.2 SparseModesNet Phase 2: Decoder Retraining
Require: Training data X, selected basis Ur , neural network hNN , epochs B
 1: Initialize hNN with parameters (W, β, W)
 2: for b = 1, . . . , B do
 3:   Compute gradients via backpropagation and update parameters
 4:   Project to orthogonal complement: W ← W − Ur (U⊤    r W)
 5: end for
 6: Solve least-squares problem (3.3) for optimal W⋆
 7: return decoder parameters (W, β, W⋆ )



     Data Normalization. We center the data around their temporal mean and ap-
ply min-max normalization to scale data to [−1, 1], allowing training across different
data scales. Centering and normalization are applied before computing POD modes.
During inference, outputs are denormalized and decentered to the original scale.
     Stopping Criteria. Training continues until the number of active modes (nonzero
entries in ω) reaches the target r. However, if the active mode count remains un-
changed for a number of iterations (e.g., 50), we terminate training and select the
r highest weighted modes in ω, ensuring convergence when the model has stabilized
and allowing a fully automated mode selection even when r is unknown a priori.
     Neural Network Architecture. For hNN , we employ a hybrid architecture consist-
ing of a single fully connected layer followed by a deep polynomial NN (Π-Net) [16].
The fully connected layer transforms input modes into a representation suitable for
the Π-Net to capture polynomial nonlinearities and serves as the gate layer where the
hierarchical sparsity constraint is applied during training. The Π-Net then models
high-order polynomial functions, enabling rich representation of complex relation-
ships. While this layer can be extended to multiple fully connected layers for more
intricate problems, a single layer proved sufficient for the datasets considered.
     We tested with other architectures, including standard multi-layer perceptrons,
convolutional NN, and U-Nets, but found the hybrid fully connected-Π-Net architec-
ture provided superior reconstruction accuracy and mode selection for our problems.
Further details on the hybrid Π-Net architecture are provided in Section SM3.
     Computational Cost. The basis Us is computed once upfront via a truncated
SVD, after which the dominant cost is the NN training over many epochs in both
phases. Relative to training a standard decoder, SparseModesNet adds only two
lightweight operations per iteration: the hierarchical proximal operator, which is
a closed-form thresholding step, and the orthogonal-complement projection W ←
W − Us diag(1{ωj ̸=0} (ω))U⊤s W, an O(psd) matrix product. Both are negligible com-
pared to backpropagation through hNN , so the per-epoch overhead of automated mode
selection is marginal, and the entire cost is incurred offline during training.
     4. Numerical Experiments. In this section, we demonstrate SparseModesNet
on three problems with high Kolmogorov n-width necessitating nonlinear decoders:
(i) the linear transport equation, (ii) Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation (KSE), and (iii)
turbulent channel flow. The turbulent channel flow simulations were performed on
NLR’s Kestrel high-performance computing cluster with H100 Nvidia GPUs. The
SparseModesNet implementation and all experiments are publicly available1 . Essen-
tial hyperparameters and nonlinear mapping dimensions are reported in Table 4.

     1 Code: https://github.com/smallpondtom/sparsemodesnet
                       SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                             11

     4.1. Experimental Setup. In our experiments, we consider and compare sev-
eral decoder structures across all experiments:
      1. A linear decoder selecting the leading r modes based on the energy heuristic.
      2. The Greedy Quadratic Manifold approach [61], which uses quadratic mani-
         folds and greedy mode selection to minimize reconstruction error. We also
         include a Greedy Cubic Manifold extension (not in the original work) using
         cubic mappings for fair comparison with our Π3 -Net. Both use the authors’
         publicly available code2 . For more details on greedy methods, see Section A.
      3. SparseModesNet with hybrid 2nd -order (Π2 -Net) and 3rd -order (Π3 -Net) deep
         polynomial networks as nonlinear decoders (architecture details are included
         in Section SM3). For comparison, we also present results training these archi-
         tectures with the leading r modes instead of SparseModesNet-selected modes,
         using identical hyperparameters to highlight mode selection importance.
     For each method, we report relative reconstruction errors:
                                                   ∥X − (D ◦ E)(X)∥F
(4.1)            relative reconstruction error =                     ,
                                                         ∥X∥F

where X ∈ Rd×n contains all snapshots, and E and D are the encoder and decoder
mappings applied column-wise to X. Beyond reconstruction error, we assess decoder
interpretability through mode fitting as done in [64, 19]. For mode fitting, we compute
POD modes from the reconstructed data from the decoder and compare them to the
true modes from original data X. While data fitting evaluates pointwise accuracy via
reconstruction errors, mode fitting reveals whether the decoder preserves underlying
physical structures encoded in dominant spatial patterns. A decoder may achieve low
reconstruction error while failing to capture the physically meaningful modes that
govern system dynamics.
    4.2. Linear Transport Equation.
     4.2.1. Problem Setup. Following [28, 61], we consider the one-dimensional
linear transport equation
                          ∂             ∂
(4.2)                        x(ξ, t) + c x(ξ, t) = 0,    ξ ∈ R,
                          ∂t            ∂ξ
with spatial coordinate ξ, time t ∈ [0, T ], and constant advection velocity c. The
exact solution is x(ξ, t) = x0 (ξ − ct), where x0 is a Gaussian bump initial condition:
                                                                    !
                                                                  2
                                          1             (ξ − 0.1)
                    x0 = x(ξ, 0) = √            exp −                 .
                                        0.0005π           0.0005

We define the spatial domain ξ ∈ [0, 1] with 1024 grid points and time domain t ∈
[0, 0.15] with 103 instances, yielding data dimension d = 1024 and n = 1000 snapshots.
The advection velocity is set to c = 5. For mode selection, we use the leading s = 100
modes as candidates and select r = 15 modes.
    4.2.2. Results. Figure 2 presents relative reconstruction errors versus mode
count for various decoder architectures. Standard POD with leading-r modes (black)
exhibits a persistent error plateau at 10−1 , demonstrating that linear combinations
of energetic modes cannot capture the nonlinear solution manifold structure.
   2 GreedyQM Code: https://github.com/Algopaul/greedy quadratic manifolds
12                                          T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC

                                  100
Relative Reconstruction Error
                                                                                                  POD (leading-r)
                                10−3
                                                                                                  Greedy Quadratic Manifold
                                                                                                  Greedy Cubic Manifold
                                10−6
                                                                                                  SparseModesNet Π2-Net (selected)
                                                                                                  SparseModesNet Π3-Net (selected)
                                10−9
                                                                                                  SparseModesNet Π2-Net (leading-r)
                                                                                                  SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r)
                                10−12


                                    0   2       4    6       8      10    12     14
                                                     Number of Modes r
                          Fig. 2. Relative reconstruction errors for the linear transport with different decoder structures.




     SparseModesNet’s Π3 -Net achieves relative reconstruction error of 10−14 at r = 15
compared to 10−8 for Π2 -Net, amounting to an O(106 ) improvement. Comparing se-
lected (solid) versus leading-r (dotted) modes shows learned mode selection is critical:
Π3 -Net with selected modes outperforms leading modes by O(105 ) at r = 15. Greedy
quadratic and cubic manifold approaches show similar performance to Π2 -Net and
Π3 -Net, respectively, confirming polynomial decoders are effective and our method is
competitive with state-of-the-art greedy methods. However, while greedy cubic man-
ifold requires output dimension p = r(r + 1)(r + 2)/6 = 680 for r = 15 (due to 680
total cubic monomial combinations), our Π3 -Net maintains fixed p = 400, achieving
40% fewer output dimensions (see Table 4).
     Figure 3 compares POD modes of the reconstructed data for mode fitting across
three regimes: leading-r (1–4), seen training candidates (16, 38, 62, 100), and extrapo-
lation beyond training (mode 137). This linear transport equation exhibits structured
wave patterns across the entire energy spectrum. SparseModesNet with Π3 -Net accu-
rately reconstructs modes across all regimes, including mode 137 beyond the s = 100
training candidates, confirming the decoder captures underlying advection physics
rather than memorizing data. Standard POD fails beyond leading-r modes, while
greedy approaches and Π2 -Net show increasing extrapolation errors.For further qual-
itative assessment, we provide state reconstruction analysis in Subsection SM4.1.
     Table 1 reveals distinct mode selection patterns. Analyzing the final selected
modes are crucial as they provide further insight of the physical meaning of the se-
lected modes rather than merely the successful sparsification of modes. The Π3 -Net se-
lects consecutive odd modes [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, . . . , 19] initially, followed by higher-frequency
modes [29, 24, . . . , 42], suggesting low-frequency modes capture primary wave struc-
ture while selected high-frequency modes represent fine-scale features. The Π2 -Net
shows similar preference for odd modes with different high-frequency selection, indi-
cating cubic architecture enables different mode utilization. In contrast, greedy meth-
ods exhibit less structured patterns, with Greedy Cubic Manifold notably including
mode 92 early in greedy selection. Nevertheless, even though the SparseModesNet-
selected modes are ordered by decreasing ω magnitude rather than greedy selection
order, it is notable that they share similar selection patterns. In Subsection SM4.2,
we further visualize the automated mode selection process during training.
     These results show how SparseModesNet outperforms linear approaches and com-
petes with state-of-the-art greedy methods. The combination of mode selection and
cubic nonlinearity achieves machine-precision reconstruction with only 15 modes, pro-
viding computational efficiency for dimensionality reduction.
                                   SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                                       13

    Mode 1 (σ = 1.16e + 03)         Mode 2 (σ = 1.16e + 03)       Mode 3 (σ = 1.15e + 03)       Mode 4 (σ = 1.13e + 03)




                   Mode 16 = r+1 (σ = 6.93e + 02)                        Mode 38 (σ = 6.47e + 01) without POD




             Mode 62 (σ = 6.54e − 01) without POD                      Mode 100 = s (σ = 1.04e − 05) without POD




                                          Mode 137 (σ = 4.46e − 12) without POD




                               Mode 137 (σ = 4.46e − 12) without POD/GreedyQM/SMN Π2-Net




        Original             POD            GreedyQM               SMN Π2-Net               GreedyCM           SMN Π3-Net

     Fig. 3. Mode-fitting by different decoders for the linear transport, spanning modes within the
leading-r, within seen s candidates, and extrapolation beyond s to assess decoder interpretability.
“SMN” indicates SparseModesNet. Once the method fails, it is excluded in higher modes.

                                            Table 1
     Selected modes for each decoder in the linear transport equation, ordered by greedy selection
order (GreedyQM/CM) or decreasing ω magnitude (SparseModesNet).

                          Decoder                                      Selected Modes
                     GreedyQM                        [1, 3, 5, 7, 4, 12, 10, 20, 28, 38, 15, 48, 23, 68, 75]
                     GreedyCM                         [2, 1, 3, 92, 4, 8, 5, 7, 29, 48, 69, 42, 70, 86, 18]
              SparseModesNet (Π2 -Net)               [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 13, 17, 33, 11, 31, 27, 29, 26, 47, 24]
              SparseModesNet (Π3 -Net)              [1, 3, 5, 9, 13, 15, 17, 19, 29, 24, 22, 26, 18, 31, 42]



    4.3. Kuramoto-Sivashinsky Equation.
   4.3.1. Problem Setup. The Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation [42, 63] is a one-
dimensional nonlinear partial differential equation:

                      ∂           ∂2          ∂4                  ∂
(4.3)                    x(ξ, t) + 2 x(ξ, t) + 4 x(ξ, t) + x(ξ, t) x(ξ, t) = 0.
                      ∂t          ∂ξ          ∂ξ                  ∂ξ
We use spatiotemporal domain [0, 32π] × [0, 100] discretized with 1024 gridspaces and
2500 time instances, yielding d = 1024 and n = 2500. Due to the chaotic nature of this
equation, a larger number of modes is required for accurate flow field reconstruction.
As in the linear transport experiment, we use s = 100 candidate modes and select
r = 15 modes. We assess performance through relative reconstruction error (4.1) and
compare mode fitting across the same decoder structures from the previous example.
    4.3.2. Results. Figure 4 presents relative reconstruction errors for KSE. While
standard POD with leading-r modes shows poor performance near 10−1 to 100 , the
performance gap between selected and leading modes is smaller than for linear trans-
port. SparseModesNet with Π3 -Net achieves approximately 10−9 relative error at
14                                                T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC

                                 100
Relative Reconstruction Error
                                10−2                                                                     POD (leading-r)
                                                                                                         Greedy Quadratic Manifold
                                10−4                                                                     Greedy Cubic Manifold
                                                                                                         SparseModesNet Π2-Net (selected)
                                10−6                                                                     SparseModesNet Π3-Net (selected)
                                                                                                         SparseModesNet Π2-Net (leading-r)
                                10   −8                                                                  SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r)


                                      0       2      4      6       8      10     12     14
                                                           Number of Modes r
                                          Fig. 4. Relative reconstruction errors for KSE using different decoder structures.


r = 15 for both selection strategies, contrasting the O(105 ) difference in the linear
transport case. This suggests the KSE solution manifold is less sensitive to mode
selection due to chaotic, diffusion-dominated dynamics. The Π2 -Net achieves approx-
imately 10−3 error at r = 15, showing higher-order polynomial nonlinearity remains
important. Greedy manifold approaches exhibit performance comparable to corre-
sponding Π-Net architectures.
      This reduced sensitivity to mode selection stems from two factors. First, chaotic
KSE dynamics distribute energy more broadly across frequencies than coherent wave
structures in linear transport, reducing the distinction between optimal and subop-
timal mode choices. Second, joint training of the NN decoder with mode selection
weights allows the decoder to adapt its nonlinear mapping to work effectively with se-
lected modes, extracting relevant information even when mode choice is energetically
suboptimal. This suggests nonlinear mapping quality may be as important as mode
selection for turbulent systems, highlighting the value of expressive NN decoders.
      Figure 5 compares reconstructed POD modes across three regimes: leading-r
(1–4), seen training candidates (16, 38, 62, 100), and extrapolation (mode 240). Un-
like linear transport, KSE shows high-energy modes (1–4) with chaotic, unstructured
patterns while low-energy modes (100, 240) display well-defined periodic oscillations,
reflecting how energy concentrates in large-scale chaotic motions while coherent struc-
tures persist at lower energies. SparseModesNet with Π3 -Net accurately reconstructs
modes across all regimes, including mode 240 beyond the s = 100 training set, confirm-
ing it captures underlying chaotic dynamics. Greedy cubic manifold shows comparable
performance consistent with Figure 4, while Π2 -Net and greedy quadratic manifold
exhibit larger extrapolation errors. Standard POD fails beyond leading-r modes. Suc-
cessful reconstruction of structured low-energy modes demonstrates SparseModesNet
maintains interpretability when capturing energetically subdominant features. For
state reconstruction, we provide additional analysis in Subsection SM4.3.
      Table 2 shows mode selection patterns differing from linear transport. The Π3 -
Net selects predominantly higher-frequency modes, with modes 60 and 56 most im-
portant, followed by gradual transition to lower frequencies [18, 30, 19, . . . , 3, 2], con-
trasting with the low-frequency odd mode dominance in linear transport. This higher-
frequency preference reflects chaotic dynamics where energy cascades across scales and
fine-scale structures are crucial. The Π2 -Net shows mixed pattern from [11, 6, 3, 16, . . .]
to [. . . , 10, 7, 2, 23], while greedy methods favor sequential low-frequency modes. That
SparseModesNet achieves comparable accuracy with both selected and leading modes
despite dramatically different indices underscores the NN decoder’s ability to learn
effective nonlinear mappings compensating for non-optimal mode selection—valuable
                                 SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                                   15

    Mode 1 (σ = 1.66e + 03)       Mode 2 (σ = 5.80e + 02)   Mode 3 (σ = 5.60e + 02)       Mode 4 (σ = 5.43e + 02)




                 Mode 16 = r+1 (σ = 2.68e + 02)                    Mode 38 (σ = 7.10e + 01) without POD




           Mode 62 (σ = 1.11e + 01) without POD                  Mode 100 = s (σ = 2.80e − 01) without POD




                                        Mode 240 (σ = 8.27e − 08) without POD




                             Mode 240 (σ = 8.27e − 08) without POD/GreedyQM/SMN Π2-Net




      Original             POD            GreedyQM           SMN Π2-Net               GreedyCM           SMN Π3-Net

     Fig. 5. Mode fitting by different decoders for KSE, spanning modes within leading-r, within
seen s candidates, and extrapolation beyond s to assess decoder interpretability. “SMN” indicates
SparseModesNet. Once the method fails, it is excluded in higher modes.

                                            Table 2
     Selected modes for each decoder in KSE, ordered by greedy selection order (GreedyQM/CM) or
decreasing ω magnitude (SparseModesNet).

                        Decoder                                 Selected Modes
                  GreedyQM                      [1, 2, 4, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 9, 8, 16, 13, 12, 14, 11]
                  GreedyCM                     [1, 2, 3, 5, 4, 7, 9, 10, 6, 13, 14, 12, 82, 92, 81]
            SparseModesNet Π2 -Net             [11, 6, 3, 16, 5, 4, 8, 13, 1, 12, 18, 10, 7, 2, 23]
            SparseModesNet Π3 -Net            [60, 56, 18, 30, 19, 14, 12, 10, 13, 9, 8, 5, 6, 3, 2]



for turbulent systems where optimal mode identification is challenging. In Subsec-
tion SM4.4, we further visualize the automated mode selection process during training.
     These results demonstrate that while SparseModesNet maintains strong perfor-
mance for chaotic KSE, achieving approximately 10−9 reconstruction error with 15
modes, learned sparse mode selection benefits are less pronounced than for transport-
dominated problems. This result also suggests the possibility that linear encoding
itself may be insufficient for KSE. Comparable performance of selected and leading
modes suggests that for diffusion-dominated turbulent systems, nonlinear decoder
mapping quality may be more critical than precise mode selection, favoring expres-
sive NN decoders. This result also confirms the energy heuristic is not optimal and
alternative mode combinations could improve reconstruction.
    4.4. Turbulent Channel Flow.
    4.4.1. Problem Setup. Following [61, 60, 38], we consider turbulent channel
flow data simulated using the AMR-Wind solver [62, 40]. Turbulent channel flow is
common in engineering applications such as turbomachinery and vehicles [10]. AMR-
Wind solves the incompressible Navier-Stokes (NS) equations in Large-Eddy Simula-
16              T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


tion (LES) formulation. Using (e· ) to denote spatial filtering, the governing equations
in Cartesian coordinates with Einstein summation convention are
                                 ∂ uej
(4.4)                                  = 0,
                                 ∂ξj
                       ∂ uei   ∂ uei uej    1 ∂ pe ∂τij     ∂ 2 uei
(4.5)                        +           =−       −     +ν          + Fi ,
                        ∂t      ∂ξj         ρ ∂ξi   ∂ξj    ∂ξj ∂ξj
where ξi denotes spatial coordinate in direction i = {1, 2, 3}, uei is the spatially-filtered
velocity field, pe is pressure, ν is kinematic viscosity, ρ is fluid density, and τij is the
subgrid-scale stress tensor modeling unresolved turbulent scales: τij = ug      i uj − u ei uej .
The body force Fi maintains the flow, where the three coordinate directions represent
streamwise, spanwise, and wall-normal components, respectively.
     We simulate turbulent channel flow at friction Reynolds number Reτ = 5200 in
domain 12πδ × 6δ × 1δ, where δ is the channel half-width. The domain is discretized
on a finite-volume grid of size 384 × 192 × 32. We collect n = 1000 snapshots after
the flow reaches statistical stationarity and slice the data at the spanwise centerline
to obtain two-dimensional velocity fields of size d = 384 × 32 = 12288. We individ-
ually analyze streamwise (u1 ) and wall-normal (u3 ) velocity components, evaluating
SparseModesNet on a larger-scale turbulent example where wall-normal velocity is
more advection-dominated than streamwise velocity.
     Figure 6 visualizes the turbulent channel flow using isosurfaces and spanwise
slices for both velocity components at a time instant. Intricate turbulent structures

                         (a) Streamwise Velocity Component, u1




                        (b) Wall-Normal Velocity Component, u3




     Fig. 6. (Left) Isosurface and (right) spanwise sliced flow field at a time instant for (a) stream-
wise and (b) wall-normal velocity components.
                                          SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                     17




       Singular Value, σi
                            103
                                                  Streamwise Velocity     103
                                 1
                                                  Wall-Normal Velocity
                            10                                            102

                        10−1                                              101

                                                                                0   50   100
                                     0   250    500      750       1000
                                           Mode Number, i
    Fig. 7. (Left) Spectral decay of POD modes for turbulent channel flow for both velocity com-
ponents and (right) zoomed view of leading 100 modes.



in both components highlight the challenges in reconstructing such high-dimensional,
nonlinear flow fields. Figure 7 shows the spectral decay of POD modes for both
velocity components, including a zoomed view of the leading 100 modes. The slow
energy decay across modes indicates many modes are necessary to capture flow energy
for linear reconstruction methods, emphasizing the problem’s difficulty. For both
velocity components, the data matrix is X ∈ R12288×1000 with s = 100 candidate and
r = 15 selected modes. As in previous examples, we evaluate relative reconstruction
error (4.1) and mode fitting for standard POD with leading-r modes, SparseModesNet
with Π3 -Net, and Greedy Quadratic and Cubic Manifold approaches.
     4.4.2. Results: Streamwise and Wall-Normal Velocity Components.
The top plot of Figure 8 presents relative reconstruction errors for the streamwise
velocity component. SparseModesNet with Π3 -Net achieves superior performance
compared to all baselines. Standard POD with leading-r modes plateaus at approx-
imately 4 × 10−2 , confirming linear methods are inadequate for this high-Reynolds-
number flow. Greedy Quadratic Manifold achieves error slightly above 1 × 10−2 at
r = 15, while Greedy Cubic Manifold improves to approximately 1.4 × 10−3 . Sparse-
ModesNet with Π3 -Net achieves approximately 6.6 × 10−4 at r = 15, representing
51% reduction versus Greedy Cubic Manifold and over 94% reduction versus
Greedy Quadratic Manifold. Similar to KSE, the performance gap between selected
and leading modes is minimal (7.7 × 10−4 at r = 15), suggesting that for large-scale
turbulent systems with less advection dominance, the NN decoder’s ability to learn
effective nonlinear mappings is as critical as precise mode selection.
     The bottom plot of Figure 8 presents reconstruction errors for the wall-normal
velocity component, revealing similar trends. The wall-normal velocity exhibits more
intricate, smaller-scale turbulent structures (see Figure 6). Despite this complexity,
SparseModesNet achieves approximately 8.7 × 10−3 at r = 15, outperforming Greedy
Cubic Manifold by 78% and Greedy Quadratic Manifold by 97%. For wall-normal
velocity, SparseModesNet with mode selection achieves 33% error reduction versus
leading r modes, indicating that for the more advection-dominated component, careful
mode selection provides additional benefits beyond NN decoder expressivity.
     Figures 9 and 10 compare reconstructed POD modes for both velocity components
across mode 2, mode 16 (r+1), mode 100 (s), and mode 300 (extrapolation). Both
components exhibit progression from large-scale coherent structures in leading modes
to fine-scale periodic patterns in lower-energy modes, characteristic of wall-bounded
turbulence where energy cascades across scales. SparseModesNet with Π3 -Net accu-
rately reconstructs modes across all regimes for both components, including mode
300 beyond the s = 100 training set, demonstrating the decoder captures underlying
18                                         T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC

                                             Streamwise Velocity                            Wall-Normal Velocity
Relative Reconstruction Error                                                 100



                                10−2
                                                                             10−1    POD (leading-r)
                                                                                     Greedy Quadratic Manifold
                                                                                     Greedy Cubic Manifold
                                                                                     SparseModesNet Π3-Net (selected)
                                10−3                                                 SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r)
                                                                             10−2
                                   0   3        6        9         12   15       0    3          6          9            12   15
                                             Number of Modes r                               Number of Modes r

     Fig. 8. Relative reconstruction errors for (left) streamwise velocity and (right) wall-normal
velocity of the turbulent channel flow using different decoders.



turbulent physics. Greedy cubic manifold exhibits similar reconstruction quality. For
additional qualitative assessments, we provide comparisons of flow field reconstruc-
tions in Subsection SM4.5.
     Table 3 shows distinct mode selection patterns between velocity components,
providing physical insight into turbulent channel flow structure. For streamwise ve-
locity, SparseModesNet selects mixed distribution [1, 16, 18, 41, . . . , 3, 29, 13, 44, 20, 6],
beginning with the mean flow (mode 1) followed by low-to-intermediate frequency
modes with some higher-frequency modes, reflecting characteristic large-scale coherent
structures and elongated streaks. Wall-normal velocity selects predominantly higher-
frequency modes [1, 51, 45, 55, . . . , 60, 21, 12, 20], with six of the top seven non-mean
modes in the 45–60 range. This higher-frequency preference corresponds physically to
wall-normal velocity’s role in turbulent transport perpendicular to the wall, charac-
terized by smaller-scale ejection and sweep events dominating turbulent momentum
transfer [69, 55]. Greedy methods select more sequential low-to-intermediate fre-
quency modes, with Greedy Cubic Manifold occasionally selecting very high-frequency
modes (e.g., modes 97, 98 for streamwise; mode 100 for wall-normal), potentially in-
dicating sensitivity to initialization or local optima.
     These results demonstrate SparseModesNet achieves state-of-the-art performance
for dimensionality reduction of high-Reynolds-number turbulent channel flow, pro-
viding superior quantitative accuracy and qualitative reconstruction fidelity across
velocity components. Achieving approximately 6.6 × 10−4 or 8.7 × 10−3 relative error
with only 15 modes—over 51% and 78% error reduction versus existing non-
linear approaches—represents significant advance in computational efficiency. Crit-
ically, SparseModesNet achieves this while using lower-dimensional nonlinear map-
ping (p = 400) compared to generic cubic mapping (p = 680) across all experiments
(see Table 4), reducing inference costs. The comparable performance of selected ver-
sus leading modes suggests that for large-scale turbulent systems, investing computa-
tional effort in training high-quality nonlinear decoders may be more beneficial than
exhaustive mode selection optimization, though learned mode selection can provide
improved accuracy and valuable physical insights into multi-scale turbulent structure.
    5. Conclusion. In this work, we introduced SparseModesNet, a novel NN archi-
tecture that automates the selection of sparse, interpretable POD modes for nonlinear
manifold learning and dimensionality reduction. By integrating LassoNet’s hierarchi-
cal ℓ1 -regularization strategy with a nonlinear manifold decoder, SparseModesNet
simultaneously learns low-dimensional representations while enforcing sparsity in the
                         SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                            19

                Spanwise Sliced Streamwise Velocity POD Mode Reconstruction Comparison
                                    Original Data: Mode 2 (σ = 5.86e + 01)


      ξ3

                    GreedyCM: Mode 2                          SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 2
      ξ3




                             Original Data: Mode 16 = r+1 (σ = 2.34e + 01)
      ξ3




                 GreedyCM: Mode 16 = r+1                  SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 16 = r+1
      ξ3




                                 Original Data: Mode 100 = s (σ = 7.21e + 00)
      ξ3




                  GreedyCM: Mode 100 = s                   SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 100 = s
      ξ3




                                  Original Data: Mode 300 (σ = 7.87e − 01)
      ξ3




                   GreedyCM: Mode 300                        SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 300
      ξ3




                            ξ1                                                  ξ1

     Fig. 9. Mode fitting by different decoders for streamwise velocity, spanning modes within
leading-r, within seen s candidates, and extrapolation beyond s to assess interpretability.

                                             Table 3
    Selected modes for each decoder in turbulent channel flow for (a) streamwise and (b) wall-
normal velocities, ordered by greedy selection order (GreedyQM/CM) or decreasing ω magnitude
(SparseModesNet).

                        (a) Streamwise Velocity Component, u1
                  Decoder                                   Selected Modes
                 GreedyQM                   [1, 2, 5, 6, 9, 11, 8, 7, 3, 21, 25, 26, 19, 48, 54]
                 GreedyCM                 [1, 2, 3, 4, 12, 13, 5, 9, 19, 27, 72, 78, 97, 98, 73]
           SparseModesNet Π3 -Net       [1, 16, 18, 41, 17, 33, 12, 10, 32, 3, 29, 13, 44, 20, 6]

                       (b) Wall-Normal Velocity Component, u3
                  Decoder                                   Selected Modes
                 GreedyQM                    [1, 2, 9, 3, 8, 12, 5, 6, 30, 15, 27, 28, 4, 13, 7]
                 GreedyCM                   [1, 2, 3, 6, 5, 4, 8, 18, 7, 9, 29, 56, 32, 65, 100]
           SparseModesNet Π3 -Net      [1, 51, 45, 55, 52, 36, 19, 46, 50, 47, 43, 60, 21, 12, 20]
20              T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC

                 Spanwise Sliced Wall-Normal Velocity POD Mode Reconstruction Comparison
                                         Original Data: Mode 2 (σ = 1.89e + 01)


       ξ3

                        GreedyCM: Mode 2                           SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 2
       ξ3




                                   Original Data: Mode 16 = r+1 (σ = 1.34e + 01)
       ξ3




                   GreedyCM: Mode 16 = r+1                     SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 16 = r+1
       ξ3




                                      Original Data: Mode 100 = s (σ = 6.32e + 00)
       ξ3




                   GreedyCM: Mode 100 = s                       SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 100 = s
       ξ3




                                       Original Data: Mode 300 (σ = 9.45e − 01)
       ξ3




                        GreedyCM: Mode 300                        SparseModesNet Π3-Net: Mode 300
       ξ3




                                 ξ1                                                  ξ1

     Fig. 10. Mode fitting by different decoders for wall-normal velocity, spanning modes within
leading-r, within seen s candidates, and extrapolation beyond s to assess interpretability.

                                             Table 4
     Summary of SparseModesNet hyperparameters and nonlinear mapping dimensions used for each
numerical experiment. λ0 is the initial ℓ1 penalty, ϵ is the ℓ1 penalty’s increment factor, M is the
hierarchy constraint scaling parameter, and γ is the ℓ2 penalty parameter for W⋆ computation.

                               Hyperparameters                        Nonlinear Mapping h : Rr → Rp
                         λ0       ϵ     M      γ          Quadratic        Cubic        Π2 -Net     Π3 -Net
  Linear Transport       3.0    0.0005     12   1e–15    R15 → R120     R15 → R680        R15 → R225   R15 → R400
        KSE              3.0     0.01      12   1e–15    R15 → R120     R15 → R680        R15 → R300   R15 → R680
 Channel Flow u1 , u3    10       0.1      12   1e–15    R15 → R120     R15 → R680            ––––     R15 → R624



selected modes. This approach identifies a small subset of the most relevant modes
from a larger candidate set while minimizing reconstruction error.
     Our numerical experiments across three problems with increasing complexity,
the linear transport equation, KSE, and turbulent channel flow, demonstrated that
                        SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                 21

SparseModesNet outperforms traditional energy-based mode selection and state-of-
the-art greedy algorithms in reconstruction accuracy. The SparseModesNet with
Π3 -Net architecture achieves 50–90% reduction in reconstruction error compared
to greedy manifold methods for the turbulent channel flow while selecting different
modes, confirming that energy content is not an optimal criterion for mode selection
in turbulent systems. SparseModesNet accurately reconstructs not only the candidate
POD modes within the training set but also extrapolates to unseen modes beyond
the candidate set. This extrapolation confirms the interpretability of the learned NN
decoder through its ability to capture underlying physics via physically meaningful
POD modes, rather than merely memorizing training data. Results highlight the
potential of SparseModesNet to facilitate more accurate, interpretable, and efficient
reduced-order models across diverse scientific and engineering applications.
     Future work could pursue several promising directions. First, integrating Sparse-
ModesNet with operator learning methods such as Operator Inference (OpInf) [50, 39,
47, 17] could enable joint learning of encoder-decoder pairs with reduced-order models
(ROMs). Second, incorporating physical constraints directly into the mode selection
and manifold learning process through physics-informed neural networks [54] could
further enhance interpretability and generalization. Finally, we can extend Sparse-
ModesNet to other modal bases, such as wavelet bases [68], to assess its versatility.
     Acknowledgements. The authors were supported by the Department of En-
ergy Office of Science Advanced Scientific Computing Research, DOE Award DE-
SC0024721. This work was authored in part by National Laboratory of the Rockies
(NLR) for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), operated under Contract No. DE-
AC36-08GO28308. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent
the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and
the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S.
Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to pub-
lish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S.
Government purposes. A portion of the research was performed using computational
resources sponsored by the Department of Energy’s Office of Critical Minerals and
Energy Innovation and located at the National Laboratory of the Rockies.
    Appendix A. Greedy Quadratic Manifold Construction.
    We summarize the greedy quadratic manifold (Greedy-QM) approach of [61],
which serves as a main comparison method in our numerical experiments. A quadratic
manifold decoder augments linear POD with a quadratic correction:

                                 D(z) = Ur z + Wh2 (z),

where Ur ∈ Rd×r contains r orthonormal modes, W ∈ Rd×p2 is a weight matrix, and
h2 : Rr → Rp2 with p2 = r(r + 1)/2 is the quadratic feature map
                                                                             ⊤
(A.1)           h2 (z) = z1 z1    z1 z2   ···   z1 zr   z2 z2   ···   zr zr        ,

for z = [z1 , . . . , zr ]⊤ . The encoder is linear: E(x) = U⊤
                                                             r x.
     Let the j-th column of U be uj . A key insight of [61] is that selecting Ur as
the leading r POD modes (as in [28, 36]) can be suboptimal: the resulting latent
coordinates z = U⊤        r x may discard information critical for the quadratic correction.
Instead, the greedy method selects r modes uj1 , . . . , ujr from a candidate pool of the
first s > r POD modes, where the indices j1 , . . . , jr ∈ [s] need not be the leading r.
22            T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


In the greedy selection algorithm, given basis Ui−1 = [uj1 , . . . , uji−1 ] with selected
index set Ii−1 = {j1 , . . . , ji−1 } at iteration i, the next mode is chosen by
(A.2)
                                                                            2
  ji = arg min     min           X − P[Ui−1 ,uj ] X − W′ h2 [Ui−1 , uj ]⊤ X F + γ∥W′ ∥2F ,
                           d×p2
        j∈[s]\Ii−1 W′ ∈R

where PU denotes the orthogonal projector onto the column space of U and γ > 0 is a
ℓ2 -regularization parameter. After r iterations, Ur = [U(:, j1 ), . . . , U(:, jr )] is formed
and W is computed via linear least squares. The method exploits the precomputed
SVD to reformulate (A.2) so that the computational cost scales with the number of
snapshots n rather than the state dimension d; see [61, Section 3.2].
     Extension to cubic manifolds. The framework extends to a greedy cubic manifold
(Greedy-CM) approach with cubic corrections by replacing (A.1) with a cubic feature
map h3 : Rr → Rp3 containing all cubic monomials:
                                                                           ⊤
               h3 (z) = z13 z12 z2 · · · z12 zr z1 z22 z1 z2 z3 · · · zr3 ,
where p3 = r(r + 1)(r + 2)/6. Note that as r increases, the feature dimension p and
number of parameters in W in the greedy manifold approach grow rapidly, whereas
SparseModesNet’s use of NN decoder allows to select more modes with smaller feature
dimension p by training the NN in lieu of fixing the mapping form a priori.

                                        REFERENCES

 [1] S. E. Ahmed and O. San, Breaking the Kolmogorov Barrier in Model Reduction of Fluid
         Flows, Fluids, 5 (2020), p. 26, https://doi.org/10.3390/fluids5010026.
 [2] A. C. Antoulas, Approximation of large-scale dynamical systems, SIAM, 2005.
 [3] S. Ares de Parga, R. Tezaur, C. G. Hernández, and C. Farhat, Nonlinear projection-
         based model order reduction with machine learning regression for closure error modeling
         in the latent space, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 448 (2026),
         p. 118443, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2025.118443.
 [4] M. Balajewicz, I. Tezaur, and E. Dowell, Minimal subspace rotation on the stiefel manifold
         for stabilization and enhancement of projection-based reduced order models for the com-
         pressible navier–stokes equations, Journal of Computational Physics, 321 (2016), pp. 224–
         241.
 [5] J. Barnett and C. Farhat, Quadratic approximation manifold for mitigating the Kolmogorov
         barrier in nonlinear projection-based model order reduction, Journal of Computational
         Physics, 464 (2022), p. 111348, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111348.
 [6] J. Barnett, C. Farhat, and Y. Maday, Neural-network-augmented projection-based model
         order reduction for mitigating the Kolmogorov barrier to reducibility, Journal of Compu-
         tational Physics, 492 (2023), p. 112420, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2023.112420.
 [7] P. Benner, S. Gugercin, and K. Willcox, A Survey of Projection-Based Model Reduction
         Methods for Parametric Dynamical Systems, SIAM Review, 57 (2015), pp. 483–531, https:
         //doi.org/10.1137/130932715.
 [8] G. Berkooz, P. Holmes, and J. L. Lumley, The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition in the
         Analysis of Turbulent Flows, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 25 (1993), pp. 539–575,
         https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fl.25.010193.002543.
 [9] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Introduction to applied linear algebra: vectors, matrices, and
         least squares, Cambridge university press, 2018.
[10] J. Bredberg, On the wall boundary condition for turbulence models, Chalmers University of
         Technology, Department of Thermo and Fluid Dynamics. Internal Report 00/4. G oteborg,
         (2000), pp. 8–16.
[11] S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, Discovering governing equations from data by
         sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems, Proceedings of the national academy
         of sciences, 113 (2016), pp. 3932–3937.
[12] K. Carlberg, M. Barone, and H. Antil, Galerkin v. least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projection
         in nonlinear model reduction, Journal of Computational Physics, 330 (2017), pp. 693–734,
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2016.10.033.
                         SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                        23

[13] K. Champion, B. Lusch, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, Data-driven discovery of coor-
         dinates and governing equations, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116
         (2019), pp. 22445–22451.
[14] P. Chen, T. Hu, and J. Guilleminot, A nonlinear-manifold reduced-order model and operator
         learning for partial differential equations with sharp solution gradients, Computer Methods
         in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 419 (2024), p. 116684, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
         cma.2023.116684.
[15] H. A. Chipman and H. Gu, Interpretable dimension reduction, Journal of applied statistics,
         32 (2005), pp. 969–987.
[16] G. G. Chrysos, S. Moschoglou, G. Bouritsas, J. Deng, Y. Panagakis, and S. Zafeiriou,
         Deep Polynomial Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
         Intelligence, 44 (2022), pp. 4021–4034, https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3058891.
[17] G. Codega, A. Ivagnes, N. Demo, and G. Rozza, Machine Learning-Based Quadratic Clo-
         sures for Non-Intrusive Reduced Order Models, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing,
         (2026), pp. C505–C525, https://doi.org/10.1137/25M1766759.
[18] A. Cohen and R. DeVore, Kolmogorov widths under holomorphic mappings, IMA Journal of
         Numerical Analysis, 36 (2016), pp. 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1093/imanum/dru066.
[19] H. Csala and A. Arzani, Decomposed sparse modal optimization: Interpretable reduced-order
         modeling of unsteady flows, International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow, 117 (2026),
         p. 110124, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2025.110124.
[20] Z. Dar, J. Baiges, and R. Codina, Artificial neural network based correction for reduced
         order models in computational fluid mechanics, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
         and Engineering, 415 (2023), p. 116232, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2023.116232.
[21] A. N. Diaz, J. T. Needels, I. K. Tezaur, and P. J. Blonigan, Kernel Manifolds: Nonlinear-
         Augmentation Dimensionality Reduction Using Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces, Inter-
         national Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 126 (2025), p. e70230, https:
         //doi.org/10.1002/nme.70230.
[22] P. Dı́ez, A. Muixı́, S. Zlotnik, and A. Garcı́a-González, Nonlinear dimensionality reduction
         for parametric problems: A kernel proper orthogonal decomposition, International Journal
         for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 122 (2021), pp. 7306–7327, https://doi.org/10.
         1002/nme.6831.
[23] C. Eckart and G. Young, The approximation of one matrix by another of lower rank, Psy-
         chometrika, 1 (1936), pp. 211–218.
[24] J. H. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, Regularization paths for generalized linear
         models via coordinate descent, Journal of statistical software, 33 (2010), pp. 1–22.
[25] K. Fukami, T. Murata, K. Zhang, and K. Fukagata, Sparse identification of nonlinear
         dynamics with low-dimensionalized flow representations, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 926
         (2021), p. A10.
[26] R. Geelen, L. Balzano, and K. Willcox, Learning Latent Representations in High-
         Dimensional State Spaces Using Polynomial Manifold Constructions, in 2023 62nd IEEE
         Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Dec. 2023, pp. 4960–4965, https://doi.org/10.
         1109/CDC49753.2023.10384209.
[27] R. Geelen, L. Balzano, S. Wright, and K. Willcox, Learning physics-based reduced-order
         models from data using nonlinear manifolds, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Non-
         linear Science, 34 (2024), p. 033122, https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0170105.
[28] R. Geelen, S. Wright, and K. Willcox, Operator inference for non-intrusive model reduc-
         tion with quadratic manifolds, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
         403 (2023), p. 115717, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2022.115717.
[29] J. Guo and D. Xiao, Nonlinear Model Reduction by Probabilistic Manifold Decomposition,
         SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 48 (2026), pp. A209–A235, https://doi.org/10.
         1137/25M1738863.
[30] E. T. Hale, W. Yin, and Y. Zhang, A fixed-point continuation method for ℓ1 -regularized
         minimization with applications to compressed sensing, CAAM TR07-07, Rice University,
         43 (2007), p. 2.
[31] E. T. Hale, W. Yin, and Y. Zhang, Fixed-point continuation for ℓ1 -minimization: Method-
         ology and convergence, SIAM Journal on Optimization, 19 (2008), pp. 1107–1130.
[32] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and M. Wainwright, Statistical learning with sparsity, Mono-
         graphs on statistics and applied probability, 143 (2015), p. 8.
[33] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition, Dec.
         2015, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1512.03385.
[34] P. Holmes, Turbulence, coherent structures, dynamical systems and symmetry, Cambridge
         university press, 2012.
24             T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


[35] A. Jacot, F. Gabriel, and C. Hongler, Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and general-
         ization in neural networks, Advances in neural information processing systems, 31 (2018).
[36] S. Jain, P. Tiso, J. B. Rutzmoser, and D. J. Rixen, A quadratic manifold for model order
         reduction of nonlinear structural dynamics, Computers & Structures, 188 (2017), pp. 80–
         94, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2017.04.005.
[37] T. Kadeethum, F. Ballarin, D. O’Malley, Y. Choi, N. Bouklas, and H. Yoon, Reduced
         order modeling for flow and transport problems with Barlow Twins self-supervised learning,
         Scientific Reports, 12 (2022), p. 20654, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-24545-3.
[38] T. Koike, P. Mohan, M. T. H. de Frahan, J. Bessac, and E. Qian, Streaming Operator
         Inference for Model Reduction of Large-Scale Dynamical Systems, Feb. 2026, https://doi.
         org/10.48550/arXiv.2601.12161.
[39] B. Kramer, B. Peherstorfer, and K. E. Willcox, Learning Nonlinear Reduced Models
         from Data with Operator Inference, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 56 (2024), p. null,
         https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-121021-025220.
[40] M. B. Kuhn, M. T. Henry de Frahan, P. Mohan, G. Deskos, M. Churchfield, L. Che-
         ung, A. Sharma, A. Almgren, S. Ananthan, M. J. Brazell, L. A. Martı́nez-Tossas,
         R. Thedin, J. Rood, P. Sakievich, G. Vijayakumar, W. Zhang, and M. Sprague,
         AMR-Wind: A Performance-Portable, High-Fidelity Flow Solver for Wind Farm Simula-
         tions, Wind Energy, 28 (2025), p. e70010, https://doi.org/10.1002/we.70010.
[41] K. Kunisch and S. Volkwein, Galerkin proper orthogonal decomposition methods for a general
         equation in fluid dynamics, SIAM Journal on Numerical analysis, 40 (2002), pp. 492–515.
[42] Y. Kuramoto, Diffusion-induced chaos in reaction systems, Progress of Theoretical Physics
         Supplement, 64 (1978), pp. 346–367.
[43] K. Lee and K. T. Carlberg, Model reduction of dynamical systems on nonlinear mani-
         folds using deep convolutional autoencoders, Journal of Computational Physics, 404 (2020),
         p. 108973, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2019.108973.
[44] I. Lemhadri, F. Ruan, L. Abraham, and R. Tibshirani, LassoNet: A Neural Network with
         Feature Sparsity, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22 (2021), pp. 1–29.
[45] M. Ma, L. Fu, X. Guo, and Z. Zhai, Incorporating lasso regression to physics-informed neural
         network for inverse pde problem., CMES-Computer Modeling in Engineering & Sciences,
         141 (2024).
[46] L. Mirsky, Symmetric gauge functions and unitarily invariant norms, The quarterly journal
         of mathematics, 11 (1960), pp. 50–59.
[47] E. Parish, A. Gruber, P. Blonigan, and I. Tezaur, NN-OpInf: An operator inference
         approach using structure-preserving composable neural networks, Mar. 2026, https://doi.
         org/10.48550/arXiv.2603.08488.
[48] M. Y. Park and T. Hastie, l1 -regularization path algorithm for generalized linear models,
         Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 69 (2007),
         pp. 659–677.
[49] B. Peherstorfer, Breaking the Kolmogorov Barrier with Nonlinear Model Reduction, Notices
         of the American Mathematical Society, 69 (2022), p. 1, https://doi.org/10.1090/noti2475.
[50] B. Peherstorfer and K. Willcox, Data-driven operator inference for nonintrusive
         projection-based model reduction, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
         ing, 306 (2016), pp. 196–215, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2016.03.025.
[51] H. Qiao, P. Zhang, D. Wang, and B. Zhang, An Explicit Nonlinear Mapping for Manifold
         Learning, IEEE transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics. Part B, Cybernetics : a
         publication of the IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society, 43 (2012), https://doi.
         org/10.1109/TSMCB.2012.2198916.
[52] A. Quarteroni, A. Manzoni, and F. Negri, Reduced basis methods for partial differential
         equations: an introduction, vol. 92, Springer, 2015.
[53] N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin, F. Hamprecht, Y. Bengio,
         and A. Courville, On the spectral bias of neural networks, in International conference on
         machine learning, PMLR, 2019, pp. 5301–5310.
[54] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: A
         deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear
         partial differential equations, Journal of Computational Physics, 378 (2019), pp. 686–707,
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045.
[55] S. K. Robinson, Coherent Motions in the Turbulent Boundary Layer, Annual Review of Fluid
         Mechanics, 23 (1991), pp. 601–639, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fl.23.010191.003125.
[56] F. Romor, G. Stabile, and G. Rozza, Non-linear Manifold Reduced-Order Models with Con-
         volutional Autoencoders and Reduced Over-Collocation Method, Journal of Scientific Com-
         puting, 94 (2023), p. 74, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915-023-02128-2.
                          SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                         25

[57] C. W. Rowley, T. Colonius, and R. M. Murray, Model reduction for compressible flows us-
         ing POD and Galerkin projection, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 189 (2004), pp. 115–
         129, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2003.03.001.
[58] J. B. Rutzmoser, D. J. Rixen, P. Tiso, and S. Jain, Generalization of quadratic manifolds
         for reduced order modeling of nonlinear structural dynamics, Computers & Structures, 192
         (2017), pp. 196–209, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2017.06.003.
[59] P. Schwerdtner, S. Gugercin, and B. Peherstorfer, Empirical Sparse Regression on Qua-
         dratic Manifolds, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 47 (2025), pp. A3085–A3107,
         https://doi.org/10.1137/24M1717270.
[60] P. Schwerdtner, P. Mohan, A. Pachalieva, J. Bessac, D. O’Malley, and B. Pe-
         herstorfer, Online learning of quadratic manifolds from streaming data for nonlin-
         ear dimensionality reduction and nonlinear model reduction, Proceedings of the Royal
         Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 481 (2025), p. 20240670,
         https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2024.0670.
[61] P. Schwerdtner and B. Peherstorfer, Greedy construction of quadratic manifolds for
         nonlinear dimensionality reduction and nonlinear model reduction, Mar. 2024, https:
         //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.06732.
[62] A. Sharma, M. J. Brazell, G. Vijayakumar, S. Ananthan, L. Cheung, N. deVelder,
         M. T. Henry de Frahan, N. Matula, P. Mullowney, J. Rood, P. Sakievich,
         A. Almgren, P. S. Crozier, and M. Sprague, ExaWind: Open-source CFD for hybrid-
         RANS/LES geometry-resolved wind turbine simulations in atmospheric flows, Wind En-
         ergy, 27 (2024), pp. 225–257, https://doi.org/10.1002/we.2886.
[63] G. I. Sivashinsky, Nonlinear analysis of hydrodynamic instability in laminar flames—i. deriva-
         tion of basic equations, Acta astronautica, 4 (1977), pp. 1207–1221.
[64] A. Solera-Rico, C. Sanmiguel Vila, M. Gómez-López, Y. Wang, A. Almashjary, S. T. M.
         Dawson, and R. Vinuesa, β-Variational autoencoders and transformers for reduced-order
         modelling of fluid flows, Nature Communications, 15 (2024), p. 1361, https://doi.org/10.
         1038/s41467-024-45578-4.
[65] N. Somasekharan and S. Pan, Beyond the Kolmogorov barrier: A learnable weighted hybrid
         autoencoder for model order reduction, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
         Physical and Engineering Sciences, 481 (2025), p. 20250159, https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.
         2025.0159.
[66] A. Sudjianto and A. Zhang, Designing Inherently Interpretable Machine Learning Models,
         Nov. 2021, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2111.01743.
[67] J. Tencer and K. Potter, A Tailored Convolutional Neural Network for Nonlinear Mani-
         fold Learning of Computational Physics Data Using Unstructured Spatial Discretizations,
         SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 43 (2021), pp. A2581–A2613, https://doi.org/10.
         1137/20M1344263.
[68] C. Tilki and S. Gugercin, Wavelet-Based Observables for Koopman Analysis: An Extended
         Dynamic Mode Decomposition Framework, May 2026, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
         2605.14224.
[69] J. M. Wallace, H. Eckelmann, and R. S. Brodkey, The wall region in turbulent
         shear flow, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 54 (1972), pp. 39–48, https://doi.org/10.1017/
         S0022112072000515.
[70] Y. Xia, Q. Lu, J. Feng, and H.-Y. Bae, An Explicit Sparse Mapping for Nonlinear Di-
         mensionality Reduction, in Rough Sets and Knowledge Technology, D. Miao, W. Pedrycz,
         D. Ślȩzak, G. Peters, Q. Hu, and R. Wang, eds., Cham, 2014, Springer International Pub-
         lishing, pp. 149–157, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11740-9 15.
[71] B. Zhang, Nonlinear mode decomposition via physics-assimilated convolutional autoencoder
         for unsteady flows over an airfoil, Physics of Fluids, 35 (2023), p. 095115, https://doi.org/
         10.1063/5.0164250.
     SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE POD MODE
  SELECTION AND MANIFOLD DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION
               WITH NEURAL NETWORKS∗
TOMOKI KOIKE† , PRAKASH MOHAN‡ , MARC T. HENRY DE FRAHAN‡ , ELIZABETH
                                  QIAN† , AND JULIE BESSAC‡


    SM1. Theoretical Analysis of SparseModesNet’s Design Choice. We
establish theoretical foundations for the design choices in SparseModesNet.
    SM1.1. Assumptions & Constraints. Throughout this section, we impose
the following standing assumptions and constraints.
      Assumption SM1.1. The training data {xi }ni=1 ⊂ Rd as well as projected data
{ẑi }ni=1 ⊂ Rs satisfy ẑi ̸= 0 for all i ∈ [n].
     Assumption SM1.2. The neural network (NN) hNN : Rs → Rp is continuously
differentiable, composed of several affine transformations and smooth activations (e.g.,
tanh). Its Jacobian is denoted JhNN (ζ) = ∂hNN /∂ζ ∈ Rp×s .
     Constraint SM1.3. The first-layer weights W (1) ∈ Rp1 ×s and skip weights ω ∈ Rs
           (1)
satisfy ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj | for all j ∈ [s], where M > 0 is the hierarchy coefficient and
  (1)
Wj      ∈ Rp1 denotes the j-th column of W (1) [SM4].
     SM1.2. Notation. The standard basis vector in Rs with 1 in position j is de-
noted ej . For ω ∈ Rs , we define diag(ω) ∈ Rs×s as the diagonal matrix with entries
[diag(ω)]jj = ωj . Note that the elementwise product ω ⊙ ẑi equals diag(ω)ẑi . We
denote Θ to be the collection of NN parameters.
     We distinguish two types of superscripts throughout this section:
      • For a regularization parameter λ > 0, the pair (ω ∗ (λ), Θ∗ (λ)) denotes a
        stationary point of the regularized objective (SM1.2), i.e., a point satisfying
        the first-order optimality (KKT) conditions for the constrained problem.
                                     (1)                      (1)+
      • Given current values (ωj , Wj ), the notation (ωj+ , Wj ) denotes the output
        of a single proximal gradient iteration.
For a regularization parameter λ > 0, the active set at a stationary point is
                               A(λ) = {j ∈ [s] : ωj∗ (λ) ̸= 0}.
     SM1.3. The SparseModesNet Objective. Define the mean-squared error
loss functional L : Rs × Θ → R by
                                   n
                              1X                                               2
(SM1.1)          L(ω, Θ) =          xi − Us diag(ω)ẑi − WhNN (diag(ω)ẑi ; Θ) 2 .
                              n i=1

The regularized objective subject to the Hierarchical Constraint SM1.3 is then
(SM1.2)                     min Jλ (ω, Θ) := L(ω, Θ) + λ∥ω∥1 .
                            ω,Θ
  ∗ Submitted to the editors June 29, 2026.

     Funding: The authors were supported by the Department of Energy Office of Science Advanced
Scientific Computing Research, DOE Award DE-SC0024721.
   † School of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA ({tkoike,

eqian}@gatech.edu)
   ‡ Computational Science Center, National Laboratory of the Rockies (NLR), Golden, CO

({julie.bessac}@nlr.gov)
                                              SM1
SM2           T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


    SM1.4. Gradient Structure Analysis. We first establish the precise form of
the gradient and contrast it with the standard LassoNet architecture.
    Definition SM1.4 (Masked vs. unmasked architectures).
     • The masked architecture (SparseModesNet) uses the NN input that masks ẑi
       with the mode selector weight ω, i.e., ζ i (ω) = diag(ω)ẑi ∈ Rs .
     • The unmasked architecture (standard LassoNet, cf. ??) uses the NN input
       ζ i = ẑi ∈ Rs , independent of ω.
    Definition SM1.5. Define the residual vector ri (ω, Θ) ∈ Rd by

(SM1.3)               ri (ω, Θ) = xi − Us diag(ω)ẑi − WhNN (diag(ω)ẑi ; Θ).

Then, the loss functional admits the representation
                                              n
                                           1X
                              L(ω, Θ) =          ∥ri (ω, Θ)∥22
                                           n i=1

and is continuously differentiable in (ω, Θ).
The loss representation is immediate from Definition SM1.5 and its continuous differ-
entiability follows from Assumption SM1.2 and the chain rule, noting that diag(ω)ẑi
is linear in ω and hNN is C 1 by assumption.
    Lemma SM1.6. Under Assumptions SM1.1 and SM1.2, the gradient of the loss
functional with respect to ωj for j ∈ [s] is
                                 n
                       ∂L     2X                                       
(SM1.4)                    =−       ẑij · r⊤
                                            i uj + WJhNN (diag(ω)ẑi )ej ,
                       ∂ωj    n i=1

where uj ∈ Rd is the j-th column of Us , ẑij = [ẑi ]j is the j-th component of ẑi , and
JhNN (·) ∈ Rp×s is the Jacobian of hNN .
    Proof. Fix j ∈ [s]. Differentiating under the sum:
                                  n                   n
                         ∂L    1X ∂                2 X ⊤ ∂ri
                             =           ∥ri ∥22 =      r      .
                         ∂ωj   n i=1 ∂ωj           n i=1 i ∂ωj

We compute ∂ri /∂ωj term by term.
    Term 1: Linear skip connection. Since [diag(ω)ẑi ]k = ωk ẑik , we have
∂[diag(ω)ẑi ]k /∂ωj = δjk ẑik = ẑij δjk , giving ∂[diag(ω)ẑi ]/∂ωj = ẑij ej . Therefore,
                          ∂              
                             Us diag(ω)ẑi = ẑij Us ej = ẑij uj .
                         ∂ωj
    Term 2: NN branch. Define ζ i = diag(ω)ẑi . By the chain rule:
                 ∂                          ∂ζ
                    WhNN (ζ i ) = WJhNN (ζ i ) i = ẑij WJhNN (ζ i )ej .
                ∂ωj                           ∂ωj
    Combining terms: Since ri = xi − Us diag(ω)ẑi − WhNN (ζ i ),
                        ∂ri                                  
                            = −ẑij uj + WJhNN (diag(ω)ẑi )ej .
                        ∂ωj
Substituting yields (SM1.4).
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                          SM3

    Lemma SM1.7. In the unmasked architecture (Definition SM1.4) where the NN
input is ẑi , the gradient of the loss with respect to ωj reduces to
                                           n
                                 ∂L     2X
(SM1.5)                              =−       ẑij · r⊤
                                                      i uj .
                                 ∂ωj    n i=1

     Proof. In the unmasked case, the NN term WhNN (ẑi ; Θ) is independent of ω, so
 ∂
∂ωj [Wh  NN (ẑi ; Θ)] = 0. The result follows from Term 1 of the proof of Lemma SM1.6.

    Definition SM1.8. Define the skip gradient and network gradient components:
                                          n
                                       2X
(SM1.6)           Gskip
                   j    (ω, Θ) = −           ẑij · ri (ω, Θ)⊤ uj ,
                                       n i=1
                                          n
                                       2X
(SM1.7)           Gnet
                   j (ω, Θ) = −              ẑij · ri (ω, Θ)⊤ WJhNN (diag(ω)ẑi )ej .
                                       n i=1

Then for SparseModesNet: ∂L/∂ωj = Gskip
                                   j    + Gnet
                                           j , while for standard LassoNet:
           skip
∂L/∂ωj = Gj .
     Remark SM1.9. As training progresses and mode j becomes less informative, the
residuals ri are increasingly explained by the remaining active modes or by those
beyond the s candidates, causing ri to lie approximately orthogonal to uj , and hence
drives |Gskip
         j    | toward zero. Consequently, the network gradient Gnet
                                                                 j   in (SM1.7) can
dominate the overall gradient in SparseModesNet, accelerating the shrinkage of ωj .
    SM1.5. Proof of Monotonic Mode Elimination. We now prove the mono-
tonic mode elimination property stated in Subsection 3.2.1 of the main text. We begin
by establishing lemmas on the nullification of weights and gradients induced by the
hierarchical constraint and input masking.
    SM1.5.1. Preliminary Lemmas.
    Lemma SM1.10 (Constraint-induced weight nullification). Under the Hierarchi-
                                                        (1)
cal Constraint SM1.3, if ωj = 0 for some j ∈ [s], then Wj = 0 ∈ Rp1 .
                                 (1)                                         (1)
    Proof. The constraint ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj | = 0 implies |[Wj ]k | ≤ 0 for all k ∈ [p1 ].
                           (1)                                  (1)
Since | · | ≥ 0, we have [Wj ]k = 0 for all k, i.e., Wj               = 0.
   Lemma SM1.11 (Input nullification). If ωj = 0, then the j-th component of the
masked input vanishes: [diag(ω)ẑi ]j = 0 for all i ∈ [n].
    Proof. Direct computation: [diag(ω)ẑi ]j = ωj ẑij = 0.
     Lemma SM1.12 (Gradient severance). Suppose ωj = 0 for some j ∈ [s]. Under
the masked architecture (Definition SM1.4), the gradient of the loss L with respect to
                         (1)
the first-layer weights Wj satisfies

                                        ∂L
                                           (1)
                                                 = 0 ∈ Rp 1 .
                                       ∂Wj

    Proof. Let the NN have the form hNN (ζ; Θ) = hNN (L) ◦ · · · ◦ hNN (2) ◦ hNN (1) (ζ),
where hNN (1) (ζ) = σ(W (1) ζ + β (1) ) with elementwise activation σ. Define the preac-
tivation a(1) (ζ) = W (1) ζ + β (1) ∈ Rp1 .
SM4          T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


    For the masked input ζ i = diag(ω)ẑi , the k-th component of the preactivation is
                                           s
                                           X
                        [a(1) (ζ i )]k =         (1)
                                               [Wm   ]k ωm ẑim + [β (1) ]k .
                                           m=1

                                       (1)
Differentiating with respect to [Wj ]k (the (k, j)-entry of W (1) ):

                                     ∂[a(1) (ζ i )]k
                                             (1)
                                                        = ωj ẑij .
                                       ∂[Wj ]k

    By the chain rule:
                           n                                   n
             ∂L         2X       ∂L          ∂a(1) (ζ i )   2X                ∂L
                (1)
                    =                      ·              =       ωj ẑij · (1)        .
            ∂Wj         n i=1 ∂a(1) (ζ i )    ∂W
                                                   (1)      n i=1
                                                                           ∂a   (ζ i )
                                                    j

                 ∂L                                                  (1)
When ωj = 0,      (1) = 0 regardless of the values of ẑij and ∂L/∂a     (ζ i ).
                ∂Wj

    Remark SM1.13. Lemma SM1.12 shows that input masking causes the gradient
                 (1)
with respect to Wj to vanish when ωj = 0. This severs mode j: no gradient signal
               (1)                                                                (1)
can update Wj . In the unmasked architecture, by contrast, ∂L/∂Wj is generically
nonzero even when ωj = 0, since the NN receives the full input ẑi . However, gradient
                              (1)                                        (1)
severance alone only freezes Wj at its current value; it does not force Wj = 0. The
hierarchical constraint (Lemma SM1.10) is necessary to ensure that when ωj = 0, the
                       (1)
constraint enforces Wj = 0.
    SM1.5.2. The Hier-Prox Operator. The optimization problem (SM1.2) is
solved via the continuation strategy described in Subsection 2.2, using the hierarchical
proximal (Hier-Prox) operator developed in [SM4].
    Definition SM1.14. In a proximal gradient iteration with step size α > 0, given
                      (1)
current values (ωj , Wj ), the preproximal values are

                                    ∂L             f(1) = W (1) − α ∂L .
(SM1.8)              ej = ωj − α
                     ω                  ,          Wj      j         (1)
                                    ∂ωj                            ∂Wj

      Definition SM1.15 (Hier-Prox operator). For mode j ∈ [s], step size α > 0,
regularization parameter λ > 0, hierarchy coefficient M > 0, and preproximal values
      f(1) ) ∈ R × Rp1 , the Hier-Prox operator is
 ωj , W
(e     j

                              
                          f(1) := arg min 1 (ωj − ω
                     ej , W
(SM1.9) HierProxαλ,M ω
                                                         1     f(1) ∥22 +αλ|ωj |,
                                                  ej )2 + ∥w − W
                           j                                    j
                                  (ωj ,w)∈C 2            2

where the constraint set is C = {(ωj , w) ∈ R × Rp1 : ∥w∥∞ ≤ M |ωj |}.
    The constraint set C is a double cone with apex at the origin. The Hier-Prox
                                             (1)+                      f(1) ).
operator produces the updated values (ωj+ , Wj ) = HierProxαλ,M (eωj , Wj
     Proposition SM1.16 (Zero attractor condition). The Hier-Prox operator sat-
                          f(1) ) = (0, 0) if and only if
                     ωj , W
isfies HierProxαλ,M (e     j


(SM1.10)                           |e         f(1) ∥1 ≤ αλ.
                                    ωj | + M ∥Wj
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                                SM5

  Proof. Define f (ωj , w) = 12 (ωj − ω               f(1) ∥2 + αλ|ωj |. For brevity, write
                                      ej )2 + 12 ∥w − Wj    2
e=ω
ω ej and we =W  f(1) .
                  j
  Since C is a cone, its tangent cone at the origin equals itself:
                               
              TC (0, 0) = C = (dω , d) ∈ R × Rp1 : ∥d∥∞ ≤ M |dω | .
    For any direction (dω , d) ∈ TC (0, 0), the directional derivative of f at (0, 0) is
                                                      f (tdω , td) − f (0, 0)
                      f ′ ((0, 0); (dω , d)) = lim+                           .
                                             t→0                 t
Expanding f (tdω , td):
                            1               1
            f (tdω , td) =           e )2 + ∥td − w∥
                              (tdω − ω               e 22 + αλ|tdω |
                            2               2
                            1 2 1
                           = ωe + ∥w∥             e − td⊤ w
                                       e 22 − tdω ω        e + αλt|dω | + O(t2 ).
                            2      2
Since f (0, 0) = 12 ω
                    e 2 + 12 ∥w∥
                              e 22 , we obtain
(SM1.11)               f ′ ((0, 0); (dω , d)) = −dω ω
                                                    e − d⊤ w
                                                           e + αλ|dω |.
     Following the first-order optimality conditions, since f and a single cone of C with
the apex at the origin are convex, (0, 0) is optimal if and only if f ′ ((0, 0); (dω , d)) ≥ 0
for all (dω , d) ∈ TC (0, 0). We analyze three cases.
     Case 1: dω = 0. The constraint forces d = 0, giving f ′ ((0, 0); (0, 0)) = 0 ≥ 0.
     Case 2: dω > 0. The directional derivative (SM1.11) becomes f ′ ((0, 0); (dω , d)) =
dω (αλ − ω          e Maximizing d⊤ w
           e ) − d⊤ w.                  e over ∥d∥∞ ≤ M dω is achieved at dk = M dω ·
sign(wek ) for each coordinate k where w        e k , yielding
                                         ek = [w]
                                            p1
                                            X
                                     ⊤
                            max       e =
                                    d w           M dω |w            e 1.
                                                        ek | = M dω ∥w∥
                       ∥d∥∞ ≤M dω
                                            k=1

Thus, the infimum of the directional derivative over dω > 0 and feasible d is
                                                                       
                  inf       f ′ ((0, 0); (dω , d)) = dω αλ − ω      e 1 .
                                                             e − M ∥w∥
              dω >0, ∥d∥∞ ≤M dω

For this to be nonnegative for all dω > 0, we require
(SM1.12)                              ω      e 1 ≤ αλ.
                                      e + M ∥w∥
    Case 3: dω < 0. Writing dω = −δ with δ > 0, a similar argument yields
(SM1.13)                             −ω      e 1 ≤ αλ.
                                      e + M ∥w∥
Combining (SM1.12) and (SM1.13) gives |e        e 1 ≤ αλ, which is (SM1.10).
                                       ω | + M ∥w∥
    SM1.5.3. The Jacobian Structure. The following fact establishes how the
network Jacobian depends on the first-layer weights.
     Fact SM1.17. Consider a NN with first layer hNN (1) (ζ) = σ(W (1) ζ + β (1) ), where
σ is an elementwise activation with derivative σ ′ . Let J(L:2) denote the Jacobian of
the composition of layers 2 through L. Then the j-th column of the network Jacobian
satisfies
                                                                          (1)
(SM1.14)              JhNN (ζ)ej = J(L:2) · diag σ ′ (W (1) ζ + β (1) ) · Wj .
                     (1)                                                (1)
In particular, if Wj       = 0, then JhNN (ζ)ej = 0; and if Wj                ̸= 0, then generically
JhNN (ζ)ej ̸= 0.
SM6           T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


    By the chain rule, JhNN (ζ) = J(L:2) · diag(σ ′ (W (1) ζ + β (1) )) · W (1) . The j-th
                                                                    (1)
column is obtained by right-multiplying by ej , which extracts Wj . This fact follows
                                               (1)
from the linearity of this expression in Wj .
    SM1.5.4. Additional Assumptions for Monotonicity. To establish mono-
tonic mode elimination, we impose two regularity conditions on the solution path.
These assumptions involve the stationary points (ω ∗ (λ), Θ∗ (λ)) of the regularized
objective (SM1.2) at parameter λ.
     Assumption SM1.18 (Lipschitz regularity of the skip gradient). There exists a
constant L > 0 such that for all regularization parameters λ, λ′ along the path and
all eliminated modes j ∈ [s] \ A(λ) ∩ [s] \ A(λ′ ):

               Gskip
                j    (ω ∗ (λ′ ), Θ∗ (λ′ )) − Gskip
                                              j    (ω ∗ (λ), Θ∗ (λ)) ≤ L|λ′ − λ|,

where Gskip
        j    is defined in (SM1.6) and (ω ∗ (λ), Θ∗ (λ)) denotes a stationary point
of (SM1.2) at parameter λ.
    Assumption SM1.19 (Strict complementarity with margin). There exists a mar-
gin δ ∈ (0, 1) such that at each stationary point (ω ∗ (λ), Θ∗ (λ)) of (SM1.2), for all
eliminated modes j ∈ [s] \ A(λ):

                            |Gskip
                              j    (ω ∗ (λ), Θ∗ (λ))| ≤ (1 − δ)λ.

      Assumption SM1.18 requires the skip gradient for eliminated modes to vary
Lipschitz-continuously along the solution path. For eliminated modes j, we obtain
ωj∗ (λ) = 0, so Gskip
                 j     varies only through changes in the residual induced by the active
parameters; this dependence is typically well-behaved. Assumption SM1.19 posits a
strict gap between the gradient magnitude |Gskip  j  | and the threshold λ. Recalling Re-
                  skip                   skip
mark SM1.9, |Gj | is small given Gj           is a weighted sum of inner products r⊤ i uj
(cf. (SM1.6)) with ri and uj being nearly orthogonal. The margin δ quantifies this
gap as a fraction of λ, ensuring it grows with the regularization strength.
    SM1.5.5. Main Result.
    Theorem SM1.20 (Monotonic mode elimination).               Let Assumptions SM1.1,
SM1.2, SM1.18, and SM1.19 and Constraint SM1.3 hold. Consider the regulariza-
tion path λk+1 = (1 + ϵ)λk for k = 0, 1, . . . , K − 1 with path multiplier ϵ > 0. Under
the SparseModesNet architecture (input masking + hierarchical constraint) optimizing
objective (SM1.2), if mode j is eliminated at λk , i.e., ωj∗ (λk ) = 0, then

                               ωj∗ (λℓ ) = 0   for all   ℓ ≥ k,

provided one of the following conditions holds:
     1. L ≤ 1 and ϵ > 0 is arbitrary, or
                               δ
     2. L > 1 and 0 < ϵ ≤ L−1    ,
where L and δ are from Assumptions SM1.18 and SM1.19, respectively. Equivalently,
the active sets are nested: λ′ > λ =⇒ A(λ′ ) ⊆ A(λ).
    Proof. Suppose ωj∗ (λk ) = 0 for some mode j and index k. We show ωj∗ (λk+1 ) = 0;
the full result follows by induction.
                                                              (1)∗
    By Lemma SM1.10, the hierarchical constraint forces Wj (λk ) = 0. At λk+1 ,
                                        (1)
warm-start initialization sets (ωj , Wj ) = (0, 0).
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                            SM7

    Consider a proximal gradient iteration with step size α > 0.                 From Defini-
tion SM1.14, the preproximal values starting from (0, 0) are

                    ∂L                           f(1) = 0 − α ∂L
       ej = 0 − α
       ω                                   ,     Wj            (1)
                                                                                 .
                    ∂ωj (ωj ,Wj(1) )=(0,0)                             (1)
                                                             ∂Wj (ωj ,Wj )=(0,0)

By Lemma SM1.12,        ∂L                   f(1) = 0.
                         (1) ω =0 = 0, hence Wj
                       ∂Wj    j

    Then, from Proposition SM1.16, the zero attractor condition becomes

                                           ∂L
                    |e
                     ωj | + M · 0 = α                             ≤ αλk+1 .
                                           ∂ωj (ωj ,Wj(1) )=(0,0)

                      (1)
Since ωj = 0 and Wj = 0, by Fact SM1.17 we have JhNN (ζ)ej = 0, hence Gnet
                                                                       j   =0
by (SM1.7). The condition simplifies to

                                     |Gskip
                                       j    (ω, Θ)| ≤ λk+1 .

    By Assumption SM1.19, at the stationary point for λk :

                            |Gskip
                              j    (ω ∗ (λk ), Θ∗ (λk ))| ≤ (1 − δ)λk .

By Assumption SM1.18, at the stationary point for λk+1 :

       |Gskip
         j    (ω ∗ (λk+1 ), Θ∗ (λk+1 ))| ≤ |Gskip
                                             j    (ω ∗ (λk ), Θ∗ (λk ))| + L|λk+1 − λk |
                                          ≤ (1 − δ)λk + Lϵλk = λk (1 − δ + Lϵ).

For (7) to hold, we need λk (1 − δ + Lϵ) ≤ λk+1 = (1 + ϵ)λk , i.e.,

                     0 < 1 − δ + Lϵ ≤ 1 + ϵ         ⇐⇒       (L − 1)ϵ ≤ δ.

    Case L ≤ 1: For any ϵ > 0, (L − 1)ϵ ≤ 0 < δ, so the inequality holds.
    Case L > 1: The inequality holds if and only if ϵ ≤ δ/(L − 1).
                                                                        (1)+
    Under the stated conditions, the Hier-Prox operator returns (ωj+ , Wj ) = (0, 0)
at each iteration. The algorithm converges to a stationary point with ωj∗ (λk+1 ) = 0.
By Assumption SM1.19, this new stationary point satisfies |Gskip
                                                              j  | ≤ (1 − δ)λk+1 , so
the argument repeats for subsequent λℓ , and thus, completing the induction.
    Remark SM1.21 (Interpretation of the step size bound). When L > 1, the bound
ϵ ≤ δ/(L − 1) balances two effects:
      • The margin δ measures how far below λk the gradient |Gskip
                                                                 j   | lies. Larger δ
        permits larger steps.
      • The Lipschitz constant L measures how rapidly Gskip
                                                          j   can change. Larger L
        requires smaller steps.
When L ≤ 1, the gradient changes more slowly than the threshold of the zero attractor
condition grows, so any path multiplier ϵ suffices.
    SM1.6. Failure of Monotonicity Without Both Design Choices. We now
show that both input masking and the hierarchical constraint are essential and neither
alone guarantees monotonic mode elimination.
SM8          T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


    SM1.6.1. Failure Without Input Masking.
    Corollary SM1.22. In the unmasked architecture (Definition SM1.4) with the
Hierarchical Constraint SM1.3 and Assumptions SM1.18 and SM1.19, there exist
problem instances where a mode j, eliminated at λk , is reactivated at λk+1 = (1 + ϵ)λk
for any ϵ > 0.
                                                                                          (1)
   Proof. By Lemma SM1.10, warm-start initialization sets (ωj , Wj ) = (0, 0) at
λk+1 . The preproximal values after one gradient step are
                   ∂L                               f(1) = −α ∂L
         ej = −α
         ω                                ,         Wj         (1)
                                                                                 .
                   ∂ωj (ωj ,Wj(1) )=(0,0)                              (1)
                                                             ∂Wj (ωj ,Wj )=(0,0)

    In the unmasked architecture, the NN input is ẑi rather than diag(ω)ẑi . The
                          (1)
gradient with respect to Wj becomes
                                                            n
                       ∂L                                2X            ∂L
                          (1) (ω ,W (1) )=(0,0)
                                                    =          ẑij · (1)      ,
                     ∂Wj        j  j                     n i=1       ∂a (ẑi )

                                                                              f(1) ̸= 0.
which is generically nonzero since the NN observes the full input ẑi . Hence Wj
    By Proposition SM1.16, the Hier-Prox operator returns (0, 0) only if

                               ∂L      ∂L
                                   +M   (1)
                                                                 ≤ λk+1 .
                               ∂ωj    ∂Wj                    1

By Assumption SM1.19, |∂L/∂ωj | ≤ (1 − δ)λk since ∂L/∂ωj = Gskip
                                                            j    from Defini-
                                                                    (1)
tion SM1.8. However, there is no bound on ∥∂L/∂Wj ∥1 . Reactivation occurs when

                                        ∂L
                                M             (1)
                                                        > (δ + ϵ)λk ,
                                      ∂Wj           1

which can be satisfied for any ϵ > 0 in problem instances where mode j is informative
through the network path.
                                              (1)
    Without input masking, ∂L/∂Wj ̸= 0 even when ωj = 0. This produces a
nonzero Wf(1) , contributing the term M ∥Wf(1) ∥1 to the Hier-Prox threshold. If this
           j                                j
term is large enough, the threshold is exceeded and the mode reactivates.
    SM1.6.2. Failure with ℓ1 -Penalty Alone.
    Corollary SM1.23. Consider an architecture with ℓ1 -penalty on ω but without
the Hierarchical Constraint SM1.3. Monotonic mode elimination is not guaranteed,
even with input masking and Assumptions SM1.18 and SM1.19.
    Proof. Without the hierarchical constraint, the proximal update for ωj is soft-
thresholding: ωj+ = Sαλ (e
                         ωj ), where Sτ (x) = sign(x) max(|x| − τ, 0) [SM5].
                                                                                   (1)
    Consider the iteration at which ωj first reaches zero while Wj                       may be nonzero.
                                  (t)        (1)(t)                        (1)
Suppose at iteration t, we have ωj = 0 but Wj       ̸= 0. By Fact SM1.17, Wj ̸= 0
                                net
implies JhNN (ζ)ej ̸= 0, hence Gj ̸= 0 by (SM1.7).
    The preproximal value is

                                  ej = −α(Gskip
                                  ω        j    + Gnet
                                                   j ).
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET                      SM9
                            (t+1)
Soft-thresholding gives ωj      = 0 only if |Gskip
                                               j   + Gnet                        skip
                                                        j | ≤ λ [SM5]. Even if |Gj    |≤
                                                   net
(1 − δ)λ per Assumption SM1.19, the term Gj can cause the sum to exceed λ,
yielding
                          (t+1)
                        ωj      = Sαλ (−α(Gskip
                                              j    + Gnet
                                                       j )) ̸= 0,

and mode j is reactivated.
    The mechanism underlying Corollary SM1.23 is the dependence of JhNN (ζ)ej on
  (1)
Wj established in Fact SM1.17. Even though input masking ensures the NN output
                       (1)                                                   (1)
does not depend on Wj when ωj = 0, the sensitivity JhNN ej does depend on Wj .
This sensitivity appears in Gnet
                             j   and hence in ∂L/∂ωj .
    In summary, neither condition alone suffices: without the hierarchical constraint,
  (1)
Wj is not forced to zero (Corollary SM1.23); without input masking, gradients
are not severed (Corollary SM1.22). SparseModesNet employs both, achieving the
monotonic mode elimination of Theorem SM1.20.
     SM2. Comparison Study of Different Mode Selection Strategies. As dis-
cussed in Subsection 3.2.1, SparseModesNet differs from the original LassoNet frame-
work in that the NN component receives only the selected modes (ω ⊙ z) rather than
the full candidate set (z). Following the original LassoNet framework instead would
yield the optimization problem
(SM2.1)
                         Xn
                                                            2
                  min        xi − Us (ω ⊙ zi ) − WhNN (zi ) 2 + λ∥ω∥1
                 ω,hNN ,W
                       i=1
                   (1)                                              ⊤
    subject to   ∥Wj ∥∞ ≤ M |ωj |        and [Us diag(1{ωj ̸=0} (ω))] W = 0, ∀j ∈ [s].

     We also discussed how, when both components receive the same selected-mode
input, the hierarchical sparsity constraint may be unnecessary and a simpler ℓ1 regu-
larization on ω might suffice, yielding the alternative problem:
                              n
                              X                                         2
                     min            xi − Us (ω ⊙ zi ) − WhNN (ω ⊙ zi ) 2 + λ∥ω∥1
(SM2.2)            ω,hNN ,W
                              i=1
                                                           ⊤
                      subject to      [Us diag(1{ωj ̸=0} (ω))] W = 0, ∀j ∈ [s].

     To evaluate SparseModesNet against these alternatives, we compare three mode
selection strategies:
       • SparseModesNet (Proposed): as in (3.2), the NN component receives
         only the selected modes (ω ⊙ z) and the hierarchical sparsity constraint is
         enforced.
       • LassoNet with hNN (z) (unmasked): the NN component receives the full
         candidate set (z) while the hierarchical sparsity constraint is retained, as
         in (SM2.1).
       • ℓ1 -penalty only: the NN component receives only the selected modes (ω ⊙
         z) but uses only ℓ1 regularization on ω, without the hierarchical sparsity
         constraint, as in (SM2.2).
     We adopt the experimental setup of Subsection 4.2, training a nonlinear decoder
for a Π2 -Net model while selecting modes that minimize the reconstruction error for
the linear transport equation. To account for variability due to random initialization
of NN weights and biases, we repeat the training 100 times per method and report
the statistics of the final reconstruction error at reduced dimension r = 15, along
SM10                                              T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


with the mode selection patterns. For a fair comparison, the stopping criteria and
hyperparameters are kept consistent across all three methods, with mode selection
stopped once the number of modes decreases to r = 15.
    Figure SM1 presents the frequency of selecting each POD mode over the 100 runs
per method, while Figure SM2 shows the corresponding box plots of reconstruction
errors. SparseModesNet selects a more diverse range of modes, including lower-energy
ones, whereas both the ℓ1 -penalty only and LassoNet-style variants exhibit a strong
bias toward higher-energy modes, commonly known as the spectral bias [SM6].

                                     SparseModesNet (Proposed)                        `1 penalty only                       LassoNet with hNN(z)
                           100                                          100
Number of Times Selected




                                                                                                                   80
                            80                                           80

                                                                                                                   60
                            60                                           60


                            40                                           40                                        40


                            20                                           20                                        20


                             0                                            0                                         0
                                 0           20         40         60         0           20            40    60        0        20          40      60
                                               Mode Index                                  Mode Index                              Mode Index


     Fig. SM1. Comparison of the three different mode selection strategies in terms of the frequency
of selecting each POD mode over 100 independent training runs. The proposed SparseModesNet
framework (left) selects a wider range of modes including low-energy modes, while the ℓ1 -penalty
only variant (middle) and LassoNet-style variant (right) exhibit a strong bias toward selecting
higher-energy modes.



                                                               Reconstruction Error Comparison Across Mode Selection Variants
                                                                                           µ = 1.33e − 07
                                                                                           σ = 1.42e − 07

                                     LassoNet with hNN(z)


                                                                                                                            µ = 6.04e − 06
                                                                                                                            σ = 3.85e − 06

                                           `1 penalty only


                                                                         µ = 1.81e − 08
                                                                         σ = 1.86e − 08

     SparseModesNet (Proposed)


                                                        10−9                  10−8               10−7          10−6                   10−5         10−4
                                                                                           Relative Reconstruction Error


     Fig. SM2. Box plot of the reconstruction error for the three different mode selection strategies
over 100 independent training runs. The proposed SparseModesNet framework (bottom) achieves
significantly lower reconstruction error with substantially less variability compared to the other two
variants.

    Quantitatively, SparseModesNet achieves the lowest mean reconstruction error
(µ = 1.81 × 10−8 ) with minimal variability (σ = 1.86 × 10−8 ). The LassoNet-style
variant is moderate (µ = 1.33 × 10−7 , σ = 1.42 × 10−7 ), roughly a 7-fold increase over
      SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET SM11


SparseModesNet, while the ℓ1 -penalty only variant is far worse (µ = 6.04 × 10−6 , σ =
3.85 × 10−6 )—more than 300 times higher than the proposed method. This suggests
that the hierarchical sparsity constraint, combined with feeding selected modes to both
components, encourages the selection of modes that may not be the most energetic
yet yield superior reconstruction.
     The ℓ1 -penalty only variant strongly favors the most energetic modes and rarely
selects lower-energy ones. In the rare cases when it does, it attains reconstruction er-
rors comparable to SparseModesNet, as seen in the low-error outliers in Figure SM2,
but this behavior is inconsistent and infrequent. The LassoNet-style variant, which
enforces the hierarchical sparsity constraint but feeds the full candidate set to the
NN component, also biases toward higher-energy modes; this likely drives its higher
reconstruction errors relative to SparseModesNet, though it still substantially outper-
forms the ℓ1 -penalty only approach. Overall, SparseModesNet consistently identifies
relevant modes that yield superior reconstruction compared to the alternatives.
     Figure SM3 illustrates the mode elimination process of a single training instance
over the entire regularization path, including intermediate epochs for each λ. Sparse-
ModesNet eliminates modes monotonically, whereas the other two variants spuriously
reactivate previously eliminated modes—consistent with our monotonic mode elimina-
tion results in Subsection SM1.5. We also observe faster sparsification in SparseMod-
esNet than in the LassoNet-style variant, matching the insight from Remark SM1.9
that the network gradient can accelerate the shrinkage of ωj as it becomes less infor-
mative.

                                                         100
                                                                                                                        z-batch (unmasked)
            Number of Selected Modes (s = 100, r = 15)




                                                          75
                                                          50
                                                          25
                                                           0
                                                               0              100                  200                  300                    400
                                                         100
                                                          75
                                                                                                                                   `1 penalty only
                                                          50
                                                          25
                                                           0
                                                               0         10         20        30          40           50            60        70
                                                         100
                                                          75
                                                                                                               SparseModesNet (Proposed)
                                                          50
                                                          25
                                                           0
                                                               0        10      20       30          40           50          60          70         80
                                                                   Entire Regularization Path Including Intermediate Epochs

     Fig. SM3. Comparison of mode elimination for a single training instance throughout the entire
regularization path including intermediate epochs for each λ value. Our proposed SparseModesNet
shows monotonic mode elimination while the other shows spurious reactivation of previously elimi-
nated modes.


    SM3. Hybrid Neural Network Architecture. This section details the NN
architecture used in SparseModesNet, consisting of a Deep Polynomial NNs known as
Π-Nets [SM2], and their combination with a linear layer to form the hybrid architec-
SM12         T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC


ture used in our experiments.
     SM3.1. Deep Polynomial Neural Networks. Deep Polynomial NNs, or Π-
Nets [SM2], are function approximators whose output is a high-order polynomial of
the input, in contrast to standard Deep Convolutional NNs (DCNNs), which com-
pose linear operators with nonlinear activations. While any smooth function admits
a polynomial approximation, a direct implementation suffers a combinatorial explo-
sion in parameters, growing as O(oN ) for an o-dimensional input and an N th -order
polynomial. To overcome this, Π-Nets cast parameter estimation as a coupled ten-
sor factorization: decomposing the high-order parameter tensors and enforcing factor
sharing sharply reduces the number of learnable parameters and enables an efficient
implementation through hierarchical neural network architectures.
     A vector-valued function g(y) : Ro → Rp (with o an arbitrary input dimension)
is modeled as an N th -order multivariate polynomial of y, whose vectorized output v
is
                                                            
                                         XN         n+1
                                                    Y
(SM3.1)                 v = g(y) = β π +     Wπ(n)     ×j y 
                                         n=1        j=2


                                         (n)                N
where β π ∈ Rp is a bias term and {Wπ ∈ Rp×o×···×o }n=1 are the learnable pa-
rameter tensors for each order n. We distinguish the first-layer weight W (1) of our
                                                                 (n)
SparseModesNet architecture from the Π-Net layer tensors Wπ , n = 1, . . . , N .
     The core innovation of Π-Nets is structuring these tensors through joint decompo-
               (n)
sitions: all {Wπ }Nn=1 are jointly factorized via a coupled CANDECOMP/PARAFAC
(CP) decomposition [SM1, SM3], with factors for lower-order terms shared. Denote
                                                   (n)      (n)       n
the matrix form of the CP decomposition of Wπ by Wπ ∈ Rp×o , and the factor
matrices by C ∈ Rp×k and Pn ∈ Ro×k , n = 1, . . . , N , where k is the CP rank. For
example, a 3rd -order polynomial is
                                               ⊤                       ⊤
          g(y) = β π + CP⊤
                         1 y + C(P3 ∗ P1 ) (y ∗ y) + C(P2 ∗ P1 ) (y ∗ y)
                                     ⊤
                  + C(P3 ∗ P2 ∗ P1 ) (y ∗ y ∗ y)

where ∗ denotes the Khatri-Rao or column-wise Kronecker product. This polynomial
can then be generalized by the following recursive relation:

(SM3.2)             vn = (P⊤
                           n y) ⊙ vn−1 + vn−1 ,     n = 2, . . . , N

with v1 = C(P⊤ 1 y) and v = CvN + β π , where ⊙ is the element-wise product and β π
an optional bias. This recursive form shows how a standard linear or convolutional
layer becomes a polynomial one; see [SM2] for details. In practice, one defines the
polynomial order N and CP rank k, takes C, Pn , and β π as learnable parameters,
and computes the forward model via the recursion (SM3.2), enabling efficient training
and inference.
     SM3.2. Hybrid Architecture: Fully Connected Layer + Π-Net. Al-
though the Π-Net is itself highly expressive through polynomial expansions, a hybrid
approach can be beneficial when reconstructing data with both linear and nonlinear
characteristics from a limited number of modes. We therefore combine a standard
fully connected layer with a Π-Net, leveraging the strengths of both standard NN
transformations and polynomial approximations. Figure SM4 shows the schematic.
       SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET SM13


The portion following the first layer realizes the recursion (SM3.2) for a 3rd -order
polynomial, which takes the first-layer output as input in the form:

(SM3.3)                          y = W (1) (ω ⊙ ẑ) + β (1) ∈ Ro ,

with an identity activation, first-layer weights W (1) ∈ Ro×s , and bias β (1) ∈ Ro . This
affine layer maps the input features/modes into a representation better suited for the
Π-Net to capture polynomial nonlinearities, and also serves as the gate layer where
the hierarchical sparsity constraint is applied during training.

      Hybrid Architecture (Π3 -Net): Fully Connected Layer + 3rd -Order Π-Net




      Fig. SM4. Schematic of the hybrid architecture combining a fully connected layer with a Π-Net.
The input first passes through a fully connected layer, which is then fed into the Π-Net to produce the
final output. This architecture leverages the strengths of both linear transformations and polynomial
approximations for enhanced expressivity.


     This choice is necessary because applying the hierarchical sparsity constraint di-
rectly to the Π-Net CP factors would be non-trivial and complicate training. Placing
it on the fully connected layer lets us control mode selection while retaining the poly-
nomial expressivity of the Π-Net.
     We note that this shallow hybrid—a single fully connected layer with no nonlinear
activation followed by a Π-Net—performed best in our experiments, outperforming
deeper variants with additional fully connected layers before or after the Π-Net. This
suggests that complicated architectures are unnecessary for reconstructing data from
a limited number of modes, as the Π-Net already provides sufficient expressivity.
     SM4. Additional Numerical Results.
    SM4.1. Wave profile reconstructions of the linear transport equation.
For the linear transport equation example, we also conduct comparisons of the recon-
structed wave profiles in Figure SM5. This analysis provides qualitative validation of
the reconstruction accuracy at three different time instances. At all times, the POD
reconstruction exhibits significant amplitude and phase errors, while both the Greedy
Quadratic Manifold and SparseModesNet (Π3 -Net) maintain high fidelity.
    SM4.2. Sparse mode selection process for the linear transport equa-
tion. Figure SM6 shows mode selection weight ω evolution during training for Π2 -
Net. This plot is essential as it demonstrates the automated mode selection process,
in which SparseModesNet identifies 15 important modes (solid lines converging to
10−2 –10−4 ) while pruning others toward zero (faded lines decaying to 10−6 or below).
Convergence to r = 15 occurs within 6–8 λ iterations (100 epochs each), demonstrat-
ing efficient sparse selection. The O(102 ) magnitude spread among selected ω values
reveals an importance hierarchy. Furthermore, this plot demonstrates the monotonic
SM14                              T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC

                                                       Wave Profiles at Different Time Points
                                 t = 0.010                                            t = 0.075                                                  t = 0.113
          25                                                         25                                                     25
                                        Original
                                        POD (r=15)
          20                                                         20                                                     20
                                        GreedyQM
          15                            SMN (Π3-Net)                 15                                                     15
x(ξ, t)




                                                           x(ξ, t)




                                                                                                                  x(ξ, t)
          10                                                         10                                                     10

           5                                                          5                                                      5

           0                                                          0                                                      0


               0.0         0.2   0.4   0.6     0.8   1.0                  0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8       1.0                  0.0   0.2       0.4   0.6       0.8   1.0
                                  Space ξ                                              Space ξ                                                    Space ξ


    Fig. SM5. Comparison of the wave profiles at different time instances for the exact solution
and the reconstructed solutions for different decoder structures for the linear transport equation.
“SMN” is a shorthand for SparseModesNet.



                          10−2
                                                                           ω Evolution (Π2-Net)


                          10−3
               ω values




                          10−4



                          10−5
                                             selected
                                             not selected
                          10−6
                                   0           1              2                 3           4           5                        6           7               8
                                                                                      λ iteration
     Fig. SM6. Evolution of selected modes ω over sparsity parameter λ updates for SparseModesNet
with Π2 -Net for the linear transport, showcasing the automatic mode selection process.



mode elimination as stated in Theorem SM1.20. The Π3 -Net exhibits qualitatively
similar behavior and is omitted for brevity.
    SM4.3. Wave profile reconstructions of the KSE. Similar to the linear
transport equation, we compare wave profiles in Figure SM7, which demonstrate
the reconstruction quality at three time instances spanning the turbulent evolution.
Across all times, the POD reconstruction fails to capture the complex turbulent struc-
tures, exhibiting significant amplitude errors similar to the previous example. The
Greedy Quadratic Manifold and SparseModesNet (Π3 -Net) maintain high fidelity to
the exact solution.
    SM4.4. Sparse mode selection process for the KSE. Figure SM8 shows
mode selection weight evolution during training for Π3 -Net. Compared to linear
transport, KSE requires longer training, with modes remaining constant at 16 for
an extended period rather than 6–8 iterations. After 50 iterations, the mode with
lowest weight in ω was automatically removed to select the best 15 modes. This
automatic truncation based on the weight magnitudes demonstrate the mode selection
                    SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET SM15

                                                            Wave Profiles at Different Time Points
                                  t = 25.010                                              t = 50.020                                      t = 75.030
           3                                                                                                                 4
                                                                        4
                                                                                                                             3
                                                                        3
           2
                                                                        2                                                    2
x(ξ, t)




                                                             x(ξ, t)




                                                                                                                  x(ξ, t)
           1                                                            1                                                    1

                                             Original                   0                                                    0
           0                                 POD (r=15)
                                                                       −1
                                             GreedyQM                                                                       −1
                                             SMN (Π3-Net)              −2
          −1                                                                                                                −2
                0            25         50     75      100                  0        25       50       75   100                  0   25       50       75   100
                                  Space (ξ)                                               Space (ξ)                                       Space (ξ)


     Fig. SM7. Comparison of the wave profiles at different time instances for the exact solution
and the reconstructed solutions for different decoder structures for the KSE. “SMN” is a shorthand
for SparseModesNet.


                                                                            ω Evolution (Π3-Net)
                          10−1


                          10−2
               ω values




                          10−3


                          10−4


                          10−5                                                                                                       selected
                                                                                                                                     not selected
                          10−6
                                    0                 10                        20                    30                    40              50
                                                                                          λ iteration
     Fig. SM8. Evolution of selected modes ω over sparsity parameter λ updates for SparseModesNet
Π3 -Net for KSE, showcasing the automatic mode selection with the continuation strategy.



automation in SparseModesNet, which is especially beneficial when the target reduced
rank-r to achieve a specific target reconstruction error is unknown a priori. Selected
modes (solid lines) converge to 10−2 to 10−1 , while non-selected modes are pruned to
10−6 or below.

    SM4.5. Reconstructed Velocities for the Turbulent Channel Flow. Fig-
ures SM9 and SM10 provide qualitative validation through spanwise-sliced flow field
visualizations, comparing reconstructions against the Greedy Quadratic and Cubic
Manifold methods, respectively. The top four panels show the original data and recon-
structions from different methods, revealing that all nonlinear approaches capture the
large-scale turbulent structures. However, the error fields in the bottom three panels
expose differences in reconstruction fidelity. When compared to the Greedy Quadratic
Manifold (Figure SM9), the error field shows absolute errors spanning ±0.06 through-
out the domain, with particularly pronounced errors in high-shear regions near the
bottom wall. Both the SparseModesNet with leading-r modes and SparseModesNet
with intelligent mode selection shows reduced errors. Similarly, Figure SM10 demon-
SM16           T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC

                Spanwise Sliced Streamwise Velocity Reconstruction Comparison
ξ3                                    Original Data

                                                                                           1.1


                                        GreedyQM                                           1.0


                                                                                           0.9
ξ3




                                                                                                 u1(ξ1, ξ3)
                            SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r)                              0.8


                                                                                           0.7
ξ3




                                 SparseModesNet Π3-Net                                     0.6


                                                                                           0.5
ξ3




                                     GreedyQM Error

                                                                                           0.06
ξ3




                                                                                           0.04
                         SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r) Error
                                                                                           0.02




                                                                                                         abs. error
                                                                                           0.00
ξ3




                                                                                           −0.02
                              SparseModesNet Π3-Net Error
                                                                                           −0.04
ξ3




                                                                                           −0.06

                                            ξ1


      Fig. SM9. Spanwise sliced streamwise velocity field reconstructions at a certain time t using
different decoder structures compared to the Greedy quadratic manifold (GreedyQM) method.



strates that even the Greedy Cubic Manifold, which represents the state-of-the-art,
produces visible errors with magnitudes up to ±0.010, whereas both SparseModesNet
variants achieve reconstruction errors that are visually indistinguishable from zero.
These qualitative comparisons demonstrate that SparseModesNet not only achieves
better quantitative metrics but also produces accurate flow field reconstructions that
preserve fine-scale turbulent structures throughout the domain.
     In Figures SM11 and SM12 we see improved wall-normal velocity reconstructions
compared to the streamwise component. Figure SM11 shows the Greedy Quadratic
Manifold has errors up to ±0.08 and fails to capture fine-scale turbulent eddies and
coherent structures. Figure SM12 shows the Greedy Cubic Manifold, while superior to
its quadratic counterpart, still produces visible errors compared to SparseModesNet.
SparseModesNet successfully preserves the complex multi-scale turbulent structures
of wall-bounded turbulence at Reτ = 5200. This is particularly noteworthy for the
       SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET SM17

                Spanwise Sliced Streamwise Velocity Reconstruction Comparison
                                      Original Data

                                                                                           1.1
ξ3




                                        GreedyCM                                           1.0


                                                                                           0.9
ξ3




                                                                                                 u1(ξ1, ξ3)
                            SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r)                              0.8


                                                                                           0.7
ξ3




                                                                                           0.6
                                 SparseModesNet Π3-Net

                                                                                           0.5
ξ3




                                     GreedyCM Error
                                                                                           0.010
ξ3




                                                                                           0.005
                         SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r) Error




                                                                                                              abs. error
                                                                                           0.000
ξ3




                               SparseModesNet Π3-Net Error                                 −0.005
ξ3




                                                                                           −0.010
                                            ξ1


      Fig. SM10. Spanwise sliced streamwise velocity field reconstructions at a certain time t using
different decoder structures compared to the Greedy cubic manifold (GreedyCM) method.




wall-normal component, which is more advection-dominated and exhibits stronger
fluctuations than the streamwise component.

                                          REFERENCES

[SM1] J. D. Carroll and J.-J. Chang, Analysis of individual differences in multidimensional
        scaling via an n-way generalization of “eckart-young” decomposition, Psychometrika, 35
        (1970), pp. 283–319.
[SM2] G. G. Chrysos, S. Moschoglou, G. Bouritsas, J. Deng, Y. Panagakis, and S. Zafeiriou,
        Deep Polynomial Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
        Intelligence, 44 (2022), pp. 4021–4034, https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3058891.
[SM3] R. A. Harshman, Foundations of the parafac procedure: Models and conditions for an “ex-
        planatory” multi-modal factor analysis, UCLA working papers in phonetics, 16 (1970), p. 84.
[SM4] I. Lemhadri, F. Ruan, L. Abraham, and R. Tibshirani, LassoNet: A Neural Network with
        Feature Sparsity, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22 (2021), pp. 1–29.
SM18           T. KOIKE, P. MOHAN, M. T. H. FRAHAN, E. QIAN, J. BESSAC

                Spanwise Sliced Wall-Normal Velocity Reconstruction Comparison
                                      Original Data
                                                                                             0.15
ξ3




                                                                                             0.10
                                        GreedyQM
ξ3




                                                                                             0.05




                                                                                                     u3(ξ1, ξ3)
                            SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r)
                                                                                             0.00
ξ3




                                                                                             −0.05
                                  SparseModesNet Π3-Net

                                                                                             −0.10
ξ3




                                     GreedyQM Error
                                                                                             0.08
ξ3




                                                                                             0.06

                                                                                             0.04
                          SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r) Error
                                                                                             0.02




                                                                                                     abs. error
                                                                                             0.00
ξ3




                                                                                             −0.02
                               SparseModesNet Π3-Net Error
                                                                                             −0.04

                                                                                             −0.06
ξ3




                                                                                             −0.08
                                            ξ1


      Fig. SM11. Spanwise sliced wall-normal velocity field reconstructions at a certain time t using
different decoder structures compared to the Greedy quadratic manifold (GreedyQM) method.


[SM5] N. Parikh, S. Boyd, et al., Proximal algorithms, Foundations and trends® in Optimization,
       1 (2014), pp. 127–239.
[SM6] N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin, F. Hamprecht, Y. Bengio,
       and A. Courville, On the spectral bias of neural networks, in International conference on
       machine learning, PMLR, 2019, pp. 5301–5310.
       SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS: SPARSE MODE SELECTING NEURAL NET SM19




               Spanwise Sliced Wall-Normal Velocity Reconstruction Comparison
                                     Original Data
                                                                                           0.15
ξ3




                                                                                           0.10
                                        GreedyCM
ξ3




                                                                                           0.05




                                                                                                   u3(ξ1, ξ3)
                            SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r)
                                                                                           0.00
ξ3




                                                                                           −0.05
                                 SparseModesNet Π3-Net

                                                                                           −0.10
ξ3




                                     GreedyCM Error

                                                                                           0.0075
ξ3




                                                                                           0.0050
                         SparseModesNet Π3-Net (leading-r) Error
                                                                                           0.0025
                                                                                                         abs. error
                                                                                           0.0000
ξ3




                                                                                           −0.0025
                               SparseModesNet Π3-Net Error
                                                                                           −0.0050
ξ3




                                                                                           −0.0075

                                            ξ1


      Fig. SM12. Spanwise sliced wall-normal velocity field reconstructions at a certain time t using
different decoder structures compared to the Greedy cubic manifold (GreedyCM) method.
