                                                        Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729

                                                                 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                     Journal of Computational Physics
                                                          journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jcp




  Explicable hyper-reduced order models on nonlinearly
  approximated solution manifolds of compressible and
  incompressible Navier-Stokes equations
  Francesco Romor a , Giovanni Stabile b , Gianluigi Rozza c,                                             ,∗
  a
      Weierstraß Institute, Mohrenstraße 39, Berlin, D-10117, Germany
  b
      Biorobotics Institute, Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Viale Rinaldo Piaggio, 34, Pisa, I-56025, Italy
  c
      Mathematics Area, mathLab, SISSA, via Bonomea 265, Trieste, I-34136, Italy




  A R T I C L E                I N F O                         A B S T R A C T

  MSC:                                                         A slow decaying Kolmogorov n-width of the solution manifold of a parametric partial diﬀerential
  68T07                                                        equation precludes the realization of eﬃcient linear projection-based reduced-order models. This
  65M22                                                        is due to the high dimensionality of the reduced space needed to approximate with suﬃcient
  65D15
                                                               accuracy the solution manifold. To solve this problem, neural networks, in the form of diﬀerent
                                                               architectures, have been employed to perform accurate nonlinear regressions of the solution
  Keywords:
                                                               manifolds. However, the majority of the implementations are non-intrusive black-box surrogate
  Nonlinear model order reduction
  Scientific machine learning                                  models and only a part of them perform dimension reduction from the number of degrees of
  Computational fluid dynamics                                 freedom of the discretized parametric models to a latent dimension. We present a new intrusive
                                                               and explicable methodology for reduced-order modeling that employs neural networks for the
                                                               solution manifold approximation but that does not discard the physical and numerical models
                                                               underneath in the predictive/online stage. We will focus on autoencoders used to compress further
                                                               the dimensionality of linear approximants of solution manifolds, achieving in the end a nonlinear
                                                               dimension reduction. After having obtained an accurate nonlinear approximant, we seek for the
                                                               solutions on the latent manifold with the residual-based nonlinear least-squares Petrov-Galerkin
                                                               method, opportunely hyper-reduced in order to be independent of the number of degrees of
                                                               freedom. New adaptive hyper-reduction strategies are developed along with the employment
                                                               of local nonlinear approximants. We test our methodology on two nonlinear time dependent
                                                               parametric benchmarks involving a supersonic flow past a NACA airfoil with changing Mach
                                                               number and an incompressible turbulent flow around the Ahmed body with changing slant angle.




  1. Introduction

     Real world numerical models, based on systems of partial diﬀerential equations (PDEs), usually study a physical phenomenon
  under the i­fluence of diﬀerent parameters. For each parametric instance, a single numerical simulation could take from hours to
  weeks to complete. Such is the case for complex fluid dynamics models or general large-scale simulations. Fortunately, in some
  cases, the outputs of these models show evident correlations among them, partially because they follow the same physical laws


      * Corresponding author.
        E-mail addresses: francesco.romor@wias-berlin.de (F. Romor), giovanni.stabile@santannapisa.it (G. Stabile), gianluigi.rozza@sissa.it (G. Rozza).

  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2025.113729
  Received 10 October 2023; Received in revised form 14 November 2024; Accepted 6 January 2025


Available online 13 January 2025
0021-9991/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                          Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
embedded in the numerical models and partially because the parameters’ dependency aﬀects the solutions only through relatively
small perturbations. Reduced-order modeling (ROM) leverages these correlations among snapshots, i.e. single solutions corresponding
to diﬀerent parametric instances, to reduce the computational time. The most successful model order reduction (MOR) methods
combine the knowledge from the physical and the numerical models with the information coming from a database of solutions. One
of the most employed methods is the reduced basis method [1,2]. As most numerical models search for the solutions on discrete finite
dimensional vector spaces like the Finite Volumes Method (FVM), the Finite Element Method (FEM), the Spectral Element Method
(SEM) and the Discontinuous Galerkin Method (DGM), model order reduction exploits the prior information coming from a dataset
of training snapshots to update these ansatz spaces. This results in very low-dimensional linear vector spaces for which seeking the
solutions associated to new parametric instances is more eﬃcient if these solutions are expected to be correlated with the training
dataset. Fundamentally, ROMs amortize the cost of computing an initial training database of solutions and low-dimensional adapted
ansatz spaces in the oﬄine stage, through subsequent eﬃcient evaluations of unseen solutions in the online stage. It is important to
remark that the numerical models employed in the oﬄine stage are still employed also in the online stage, so that the reduced solutions
are discerned in the ansatz spaces through the satisfaction of the physical principles and mathematical constraints underneath the
original numerical models.
    Some diﬃculties arise when the solution manifold, that is the space of parameter-dependent solutions, cannot be approximated
with a satisfactory accuracy by linear low-dimensional spaces. If we consider a parameter space  ⊂ ℝ𝑝 , 𝑝 > 0, and a solution map
𝐔 ∶  ⊂ ℝ𝑝 → 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 that associates to each parameter 𝝁 ∈  the corresponding solution 𝐔(𝝁) ∈ 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 in the discretization
space of choice 𝑋ℎ , where 𝑑 > 0 is the number of degrees of freedom, we can quantify the linear approximability of the solution
manifold 𝑋ℎ ⊇  = 𝐔() with the Kolmogorov n-width (KnW):

        𝑑𝑛 (, 𝑋ℎ ) =      inf      sup inf ‖𝐕 − 𝐔(𝝁)‖2 .
                          𝑊 ⊂ℝ𝑑 𝝁∈ 𝐕∈𝑋ℎ
                         dim𝑊 =𝑛

A slowly decaying Kolmogorov n-width with respect to the dimension of the linear approximant precludes the realization of eﬃcient
ROMs. One of the most prominent defects of linear ROMs is that even simple physical models, like linear advection, suﬀer from a
slow Kolmogorov n-width decay. These are cases for which the snapshots are poorly correlated, sometimes almost orthogonal in 𝑋ℎ .
    Recently, with the spread of scientific machine learning, black-box surrogate models have tackled slow-decaying KnW solution
manifolds thanks to nonlinear approximants represented by neural networks (NNs), in the form of diﬀerent combined architectures.
The majority of these surrogate models, being non-intrusive, do not even perform dimension reduction from the space of degrees
of freedom ℝ𝑑 to a reduced or latent space ℝ𝑟 , 𝑟 ≪ 𝑑 . While a low-dimensional space is needed for linear projection-based ROMs
to seek for the solutions eﬃciently in the online stage, surrogate models built with NNs rely on the fast evaluation of the nonlinear
approximants for diﬀerent inputs in the prediction phase. Apart from the imposition of additional inductive biases, the predicted
solutions do not consider the physical and mathematical knowledge of the models under study at the predictive or online phase:
in fact, they are not obtained from the satisfaction of first principles like classical ROMs. Moreover, when dimension reduction is
performed, it is essentially needed for feature extraction rather than to increase the eﬃciency of the surrogate models. Nonetheless,
when architectures like autoencoders (AE) are employed, the approximation error of the solution manifolds decays more rapidly with
respect to the latent dimension when compared to linear subspaces. This can be quant­fied with an extension of the deﬁnition of
KnW, that is the manifold width [3] 𝛿𝑛 for continuous maps:

        𝛿𝑛 (, 𝑋ℎ ) =        inf      sup ‖𝐔(𝝁) − (𝜙 ◦ 𝜓)(𝐔(𝝁))‖2 ,
                         𝜓∈(𝑋ℎ ,ℝ𝑟 ) 𝝁∈
                         𝜙∈(ℝ𝑟 ,𝑋ℎ )

where 𝜓 ∈ (𝑋ℎ , ℝ𝑟 ) and 𝜙 ∈ (ℝ𝑟 , 𝑋ℎ ) are continuous maps represented in our case by NNs. Other extensions of the KnW include
the stable manifold widths [4] and Lipschitz widths [5]. This enables the design of eﬃcient intrusive ROMs even for models with a
slow KnW decay.
    The first employment of convolutional autoencoders for intrusive ROMs, namely Galerkin and least-squares Petrov-Galerkin non­
linear manifold methods appears in [6]. The major evident drawback is that both the architecture and the numerical schemes employed
in the online predictive phase depend on the number of degrees of freedom (dofs), so the procedure itself is even slower than the
full-order models. Typically, when performing MOR of nonlinear parametric PDEs hyper-reduction is employed to achieve indepen­
dence with respect to the number of dofs. In this case, another ingredient complicates the matter since the nonlinearity coming
from the decoder map needs also to be treated and made independent of the number of dofs. One of the first approaches in this
direction is introduced in [7]. The architecture employed is a shallow masked autoencoder: the sparsity pattern imposed on the last
decoder layers reduces the computational costs of the forward and Jacobian evaluations, while Gauss-Newton with approximated
tensors (GNAT) [8] is employed to hyper-reduce the residual. One problem that arises is that shallow autoencoders are sometimes not
enough to accurately approximate complex solution manifolds and the methodology itself constraints the choice of the architecture.
The methodology is tested on the 2d Burgers’ equations solved with finite diﬀerences. Another strategy [9] uses teacher-student train­
ing to compress a generic architecture that performs dimension reduction, in this case a convolutional AE, onto a small feedforward
NN. Possible combinations of hyper-reduction with reduced over-collocation [10] only on the residual or for both the decoder and
the residuals are taken into consideration. The methodology is tested on a 2d nonlinear conservation law test case and a 2d shallow
water equations benchmark solved with OpenFoam [11]. Afterwards, in [12] they introduce a new implementation that considers
as nonlinear approximant of the solution manifold the sum of a linear subspace and a linear closure term whose coeﬃcients are the
output of a feedforward NN. The hyper-reduction method is the energy-conserving sampling and weighting method (ECSW) [13]


                                                                      2
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                    Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
and it is tested on a 2d Burgers’ equations model solved with finite diﬀerences. Another approach [14], directly employs a relatively
small decoder from the latent space to the submesh ident­fied by the reduced over-collocation hyper-reduction method as nonlinear
approximant of the solution manifold. In this way, the training phase is more eﬃcient and the solutions are finally reconstructed with
the hyper-reduction linear basis from the collocation nodes. To increase the accuracy of shallow masked AE, in [15] they implement
domain decomposition and build a local shallow masked AE for each subdomain. The procedure is tested on a 2d Burgers’ equation
model.
    In this work, we introduce a new hyper-reduction methodology and we test it on challenging benchmarks. For a moderately
slow KnW decay, classical ROMs fail, but linear subspaces can still be employed as good approximants of the solution manifold in
practice. This is the rationale behind employing singular value decomposition modes (SVD) [16], or other linear transforms or filters,
as preprocessing step to dimension reduction with AE. In section 5, we will also show a case for which this assumption is not valid
anymore and more deep NN architectures should be employed and reduced with teacher-student training following [9]. The novelties
of our new approach are the following:

   • a new collocated hyper-reduction procedure specific for our nonlinear manifold approximant that combines randomized singular
     value decomposition modes with 1d convolutional autoencoders, in section 3
   • an adaptive gradient-based hyper-reduction strategy, in section 3.2. Similar concepts of adaptation strategies are present in the
     literature [17,18].
   • the implementation of an eﬃcient way to integrate local nonlinear manifolds with intrusive nonlinear least-squares Petrov­
     Galerkin through a local change of basis, in section 4
   • the validation of our methodology on challenging test cases with moderately slow Kolmogorov n-width, in section 5

    In summary, in section 2 the nonlinear least-squares Petrov-Galerkin method is presented, our nonlinear manifold approximant is
introduced and some spec­fications regarding the normalization of the datasets and the evaluation of the randomized singular value
decomposition (rSVD) modes are made. Then, in section 3 the employed hyper-reduction methods are presented. Particular attention
is focused on the reduced over-collocation method and its new adaptive formulation in subsection 3. A brief section 4 introduces a
straight-forward way to include local nonlinear manifolds in the methodology through a linear change of rSVD basis. Finally, two
benchmarks are analyzed in section 5. A 2d nonlinear parametric time-dependent supersonic compressible Navier-Stokes equations
model (CNS) is studied on a coarse and a finer mesh. A special focus is given to the comparison of diﬀerent hyper-reduction techniques
in subsection 5.1.1 and to the implementation of local nonlinear manifolds in subsection 5.1.2. The last subsections involve the study
of a 3d nonlinear time-dependent geometrically parametrized turbulent incompressible Navier-Stokes equations model (INS).

2. Residual-based ROMs on nonlinear manifolds

    The starting point is a parametric time-dependent partial diﬀerential equation (PDE) on a computational domain Ω ⊂ ℝ𝐷 , 𝐷 =
{1, 2, 3}, with time interval [0, 𝑇𝝁 ] and parameter space 𝝁 ∈  ⊂ ℝ𝑝 :

        𝐺(𝐔(𝐱, 𝑡), 𝜕𝑡 𝐔(𝐱, 𝑡), ∇𝐔(𝐱, 𝑡), … ; 𝝁) = 0,                      (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ Ω𝝁 × [0, 𝑇𝝁 ],
                                    𝐵(𝐔(𝐱, 𝑡); 𝝁) = 0,                   (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ 𝜕Ω𝝁 × [0, 𝑇𝝁 ],
                                          𝐔(𝐱, 𝑡) = 𝐔0,𝝁 (𝐱),                (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ Ω𝝁 × {0},
where that state function 𝐔 ∶ Ω𝝁 × [0, 𝑇𝝁 ] ⊂ ℝ𝐷 × ℝ → ℝ𝑠 , 𝑠 ≥ 1 belongs to a Banach space 𝑋(ℝ𝐷 × ℝ; ℝ𝑠 ) for all 𝝁 ∈  𝑞 , 𝑞 ≥ 1,
of vector-valued time-dependent functions. The function 𝐔0,𝝁 (𝐱) represents the possibly parametric dependent initial condition. The
state function 𝐔 is a synthetic notation that can include at the same time more than one physical field, like velocity, pressure, internal
energy, and density for example. The function 𝐺 represents the PDE itself and has as arguments the state function and its partial
derivatives with respect to time and space. We do not restrict only to first order, higher derivatives are omitted. The boundary
conditions are expressed through the operator 𝐵 and are possibly parametric dependent. These deﬁnitions are introduced only to
d­fine the discretized systems we will work with. We have included also geometric parametrizations Ω𝝁 ⊂ ℝ𝐷 through 𝝁.
    We will consider nonlinear time-dependent PDEs, but in general the framework we are going to introduce can be applied also to
stationary PDEs and linear PDEs. The only requirement is the slow Kolmogorov n-width decay of the solution manifold, otherwise, it
would be suﬃcient to apply the well-developed theory of linear projection-based ROMs. In fact, employing a nonlinear approximation
of the solution manifold reduces the eﬃciency of linearly approximable solution manifolds, in general.
    To be as general as possible, we will consider a generic discretization in space, with the constraints that it is supported on a
computational mesh Ω𝝁,ℎ ⊂ ℝ𝐷 and that the discretized diﬀerential operators have local stencils in order to implement eﬃciently
hyper-reduction schemes later [1]. So, in our framework, we include the FVM, that we are employing, but also the FEM and the DGM,
for example. Applying the method of lines, we discretize in space to obtain the following ordinary diﬀerential equation

        𝐺ℎ (𝐔ℎ (𝑡), 𝜕𝑡 𝐔ℎ (𝑡), ∇𝐔ℎ (𝑡), … ; 𝝁) = 𝟎,      𝑡 ∈ [0, 𝑇𝝁 ],
                         𝐵ℎ (𝑃𝜕Ω𝝁 (𝐔ℎ (𝑡)); 𝝁) = 0,      𝑡 ∈ [0, 𝑇𝝁 ],
                                        𝐔ℎ (0) = 𝐔ℎ,0 ,


                                                                            3
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                           Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 1. Left: evolution trajectories on the 𝑟-dimensional linear latent space and solution manifold embedded in the ambient space ℝ𝑑 . The map 𝑃𝑟 is a linear
projection. Right: evolution trajectories on the 𝑟-dimensional latent space and nonlinear solution manifold in the ambient space ℝ𝑑 . The map 𝜙 is a single chart
nonlinear parametrization of the approximating solution manifold.


where in this case the discrete state function 𝐔ℎ (𝑡) ∈ 𝑋ℎ (Ω𝝁,ℎ ) belongs for all 𝑡 ∈ [0, 𝑇𝝁 ] to a discretization space 𝑋ℎ (Ω𝝁,ℎ ) ∼ ℝ𝑑
where 𝑑 > 0 is the number of degrees of freedom, with its norm ‖⋅‖𝑋ℎ . The map 𝑃𝜕Ω𝝁 ∶ 𝑋ℎ (Ω𝝁,ℎ ) → 𝑋ℎ (𝜕Ω𝝁,ℎ ) is the projection onto
the discrete boundary 𝜕Ω𝝁,ℎ of the computational domain Ω𝝁,ℎ .
                                                                                                                  ∣𝐼 ∣
    Finally, we apply a discretization in time to obtain the discrete residual 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 ∶  × 𝑋ℎ × 𝑋ℎ 𝑡 → 𝑋ℎ at time 𝑡 ∈ {𝑡0 , … , 𝑡𝑁𝝁 } = 𝑇𝝁

        𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝐔𝑡ℎ , {𝐔𝑠ℎ }𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 ) = 𝟎,                                                                                                                  (3a)

            𝐵ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝑃𝜕Ω𝝁 (𝐔𝑡ℎ ); 𝝁) = 0,                                                                                                                    (3b)

                                𝐔0ℎ = 𝐔ℎ,0 ,                                                                                                                (3c)
where the time instances are 𝑡𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑡𝑁𝝁 ], ∀𝑖 ∈ {0, 1, … , 𝑁𝝁 }, 𝑡𝑁𝝁 is the final time and 𝐼𝑡 is the set of previous time instances of the
state variable 𝑈ℎ𝑡 ∈ 𝑋ℎ at time 𝑡, needed for the numerical time scheme of choice. For most cases of model order reduction, it is
crucial that the discretization space 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 is not time or parametric dependent.

2.1. Nonlinear least-squares Petrov-Galerkin method

   We will introduce the nonlinear manifold least-squares Petrov-Galerkin method (NM-LSPG) [6] from its linear manifold version
(LM-LSPG), see Fig. 1. To perform model order reduction with LM-LSPG, we need to d­fine a linear projection map 𝑃𝑟 ∶ ℝ𝑟 → 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑
from the reduced space ℝ𝑟 , 𝑟 ≪ 𝑑 to the full-state space 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 . We require that, fixed a tolerance 𝜖 ≪ 1, the relative reconstruction
error of the linear solution manifold :
        ‖𝐔ℎ − 𝑃𝑟 𝑃𝑟𝑇 𝐔ℎ ‖2
                               < 𝜖,    ∀𝐔ℎ ∈ .
               ‖𝐔ℎ ‖2
Typically, this is achieved by sampling from the parameter space  a set of independent training parameters train ⊂  . The corre­
sponding training snapshots train = {𝐔ℎ,𝝁 }𝝁∈train are employed to evaluate 𝑃𝑟 . For every new parametric instance 𝜇 ∈ ∖train , we
can evaluate the corresponding solution solving the following nonlinear least-squares problem at each time step 𝑡 ∈ {𝑡0 , … , 𝑡𝑁𝝁 } = 𝑇𝝁
in the reduced variables 𝐳 ∈ ℝ𝑟 and with initial condition 𝐳0

        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟 (𝐳), {𝑃𝑟 (𝐳𝑠 )}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )‖2𝑋 ,                                                                                               (4a)
                                                            ℎ
                𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

        𝐳0 = 𝑃𝑟𝑇 (𝐔ℎ,0 ),                                                                                                                                  (4b)
where 𝐳𝑠 ∈ ℝ𝑟 , ∀𝑠 ∈ 𝐼𝑡 are the previous reduced coordinates needed at time 𝑡 by the numerical scheme. The nonlinear least-squares
problem can be solved with optimization methods like Gauss-Newton with line-search [6], Levenberg-Marquardt [9] and derivative­
free Pounders [19] implemented in PETSc [20], that we will employ.
    If 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 is linear, then we can solve for (4a) without reconstructing the solution onto the full-state space ℝ𝑑 . If 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 is nonlinear,
hyper-reduction techniques must be introduced in order to recover the independence from the number of degrees of freedom.
    The evolution of the reduced trajectory in the latent space ℝ𝑟 in Fig. 1 is computed without reconstructing the full-states 𝑈ℎ𝑡 (𝝁) =
𝑃𝑟 (𝐳(𝝁)). The reconstruction from ℝ𝑟 to the ambient space ℝ𝑑 is performed only at the end with the projection map 𝑃𝑟 .
    The nonlinear counterpart of LM-LSPG, poses the approximability of the solution manifold  with a nonlinear manifold. We will
d­fine this approximating nonlinear manifold as the image of a nonlinear parametrization map 𝜙 ∶ 𝑈 ⊂ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑑 , that is an atlas
with a single chart, with 𝑈 an open subset of ℝ𝑟 . For our purposes, mainly linked to the deﬁnition of the initial conditions, we also
need an approximation of the right-inverse of 𝜙, that is 𝜓 ∶ 𝜙(𝑈 ) → ℝ𝑟 such that 𝜙 ◦ 𝜓 ≈ 𝐼𝑑 .


                                                                            4
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                            Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
    There are many deﬁnitions that extend the notion of Kolmogorov n-width to nonlinear approximating spaces [3]. Our requirement
is that the relative reconstruction error is below a fixed tolerance 𝜖 ≪ 1:
        ‖𝐔ℎ − (𝜙 ◦ 𝜓)(𝐔ℎ )‖2
                             < 𝜖,      ∀𝐔ℎ ∈ .                                                                                             (5)
              ‖𝐔ℎ ‖2
   The nonlinear least-squares problem solved for each time instance 𝑡 ∈ {𝑡0 , … , 𝑡𝑁𝝁 } = 𝑇𝝁 is similar to the linear case with the
substitution of the linear projection map 𝑃𝑟 with 𝜙 and 𝜓 :

        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝜙(𝐳), {𝜙(𝐳𝑠 )}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )‖2𝑋 ,                                                                                   (6a)
                                                      ℎ
                𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

        𝐳0 = 𝜓(𝐔ℎ,0 ).                                                                                                                     (6b)
   In this case, the sources of nonlinearity are the parametrization 𝜙 of the nonlinear approximation manifold and possibly also
the residual 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 . So, even if the residual 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 is linear we obtain a nonlinear least-squares problem to solve, due to the additional
nonlinearity introduced by 𝜙. As mentioned in the introduction, this is often a necessary step to overcome the problem of a slow
Kolmogorov n-width decay with a nonlinear approximating manifold that achieves a satisfactory accuracy with a lower latent/reduced
dimension with respect to linear approximations.
   Due to the nonlinearity, in general, solving (6a) is ineﬃcient since the dependence on the number of degrees of freedom cannot
be overcome. There are two factors that contribute to making the formulation (6a) not feasible as it was introduced in [6]. As for
the linear case, the first is the nonlinearity of the residual 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 , for which hyper-reduction techniques must be implemented. The
second is the possibly expensive evaluation of 𝜙 and its dependence on the whole number of degrees of freedom 𝑑 since the image of
𝜙 is contained in ℝ𝑑 . So, hyper-reduction or similar techniques must be implemented also for the map 𝜙, that in our case will be a
neural network. See section 3 for more details on hyper-reduction and the next 2.2 for the deﬁnition of our nonlinear approximating
solution manifold through the parametrization map 𝜙.

2.2. Convolutional autoencoders: encodings and inductive biases

    Applying SVD or principal component analysis (PCA) in machine learning jargon, to extract small dimensional and meaningful
features from data is a technique largely employed in the data science community. After PCA, the new features can be used to train a
neural network architecture more eﬃciently or for other purposes like clustering. This reasoning is applied also to data representing
physical fields in model order reduction. One of the first examples is introduced by Ghattas et al. [21] in the context of inverse
problems and model order reduction: the parameter-to-observable map is trained as a deep neural network (DNN) from the inputs
reduced with active subspaces [22] to the outputs reduced with proper orthogonal decomposition (POD). In the context of model
order reduction with autoencoders this technique is applied in [16].
    We remark that an autoencoder with linear activation functions can reproduce the accuracy of truncated SVD [23], and even the
principal modes. So, employing the SVD to extract meaningful features instead of adding few linear neural networks layers does not
make a diﬀerence in terms of accuracy. What is crucial, especially for problems with a huge number of degrees of freedom, is the
eﬃciency of SVD and its randomized version (rSVD) compared to the training of neural network layers with linear activations.
    Since we are considering physical fields supported on meshes we should not be limited to SVD: other compression algorithms pos­
sibly extracting meaningful features from spatial and temporal correlations are the Fourier and Wavelet transforms. In this context,
model order reduction in frequency space is an active field of research [24--26]. Recently, also the Radon-Cumulative-Distribution
(RCD) transform was applied to advection-dominated problems in model order reduction [27]. We will represent such generic trans­
forms with 𝑓ﬁlter ∶ 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 → ℝ𝑝 and their approximate or true left inverse 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                              −1 ∶ ℝ𝑝 → 𝑋 ∼ ℝ𝑑 , such that 𝑓 −1 ◦ 𝑓
                                                                                            ℎ                   ﬁlter  ﬁlter ≈ 𝐼𝑑 .
    In this work we will only consider rSVD to d­fine the filtering maps 𝑓ﬁlter and 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                                     −1 , but the framework can be easily extended to

other compression algorithms. The deﬁnitions of 𝑓ﬁlter and 𝑓ﬁlter−1 are reported in equation (11) of the next section. We will show some

testcases where the number of rSVD modes needed to achieve a satisfactory accuracy reaches 300, underlying truly slow Kolmogorov
n-width applications, while in the literature only a moderate number of modes has been employed.
    The neural network architectures we are going to use, d­fine the maps 𝜙 ∶ 𝑈 ⊂ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑑 and 𝜓 ∶ 𝜙(𝑈 ) → ℝ𝑟 , their specifics
are reported in the Appendix in Tables A.4 and A.5 and shown in Fig. 2. They are composed by standard 1d-convolutional layers
(CNN) since the filtered states 𝑈̃ ℎ = 𝑓ﬁlter (𝐔ℎ ) are not supported on a possible unstructured mesh anymore, but belong to the space
of frequencies. In principle, also 2d-CNNs can be employed [16]. So, in general, this approach is a viable alternative to graph neural
networks [28] or other techniques that approximate physical fields supported on unstructured meshes.
    To separate the application of the filtering/transforms maps 𝑓ﬁlter and 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                                 −1 from the convolutional neural networks layers, we

d­fine 𝜓̃ ∶ ℝ𝑝 → ℝ𝑟 and 𝜙̃ ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑝 through the relations 𝜙 = 𝑓ﬁlter−1 ◦ 𝜙̃ and 𝜓 = 𝜓 ̃ ◦ 𝑓ﬁlter . So, the CNN layers are encapsulated in
𝜙̃ and 𝜓̃ .
    If the state vector 𝐔ℎ ∈ 𝑋ℎ includes more than one physical field, we have decided not to extract the frequencies or SVD reduced
variables 𝐔̃ ℎ for each field, but to do so altogether in a monolithic fashion. This results in single-channel input of the CNN 𝜓̃ and a
single-channel output of the CNN 𝜙̃ , instead of having as many channels as the number of physical fields included in 𝐔ℎ . Since we
will reduce with rSVD all the physical fields altogether in a monolithic fashion, we need to normalize the training snapshots with
respect to the cell-wise measure 𝑉 ∈ ℝ𝑑 (length, area or volume of each cell depending on the dimensionality of the mesh) and the
diﬀerent order of magnitudes and unit of measurement of the diﬀerent physical fields considered.


                                                                  5
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                             Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 2. The image shows schematically our implementation of the nonlinear maps 𝜙 = 𝑓ﬁlter−1
                                                                                            ◦ 𝜙̃ and 𝜓 = 𝜓̃ ◦ 𝑓ﬁlter that d­fine the approximate nonlinear solution
manifold. The functions 𝜙̃ and 𝜓̃ represent neural networks composed by subsequent 1d-convolutional and transposed 1d-convolutional layers, their specifics are
reported in Tables A.4 and A.5. The maps 𝑓ﬁlter and 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                       −1
                                                           are the linear projection onto the first 𝑝 rSVD modes and its transpose, their deﬁnition is reported in
equation (11).



    We remark that our CAE is trained only in the space of frequencies as input-output spaces, achieving a relevant speedup regarding
the training phase thanks to this, as pointed out in [16]. The nonlinearity of the autoencoder is only exploited to further reduce the
dimensionality from the frequency spaces and to directly approximate the solution manifold, which is eﬀectively linear approximated
in our case. For truly nonlinear solution manifold approximants see [9].
    The main concern for our methodology is achieving a satisfactory reconstruction error through the training of the autoencoders
in frequency space. If this condition is not sati­fied, the solution manifold would not be accurately approximated and it would be
pointless to proceed further. We do not report hyper-parameters studies for the autoencoder training, as our focus is on implementing
hyper-reduction and examining additional parameters that aﬀect it, such as the number of magic points. The choice of nonlinear
dimension reduction method, e.g. CNN autoencoders rather than variational autoencoders [29], could aﬀect our methodology but
further investigations, as in [14], need to be carried out: an additional regularity of the latent dynamics could be ben­ficial, as well
as imposing an accurate reconstruction of the tangent bundle of the solution manifold.

2.3. Parallel randomized singular value decomposition

    We recap in brief the procedure of randomized singular value decomposition [30], necessary to evaluate the modes when the
snapshots matrix cannot be assembled altogether due to memory and computational constraints. An alternative is represented by the
frequent directions algorithm [31]. We remark also that rSVD requires only matrix-vector evaluations and therefore can be applied
also in a matrix-free fashion [32].
    The only ingredient needed is the column-wise ordered matrix 𝐴train ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train of the training snapshots collection train ∶=
{𝐔𝝁,𝑡 }(𝝁,𝑡)∈train ×𝑇𝝁 , with 𝑇𝝁 = {𝑡1 , … , 𝑡𝑁𝝁 },

                 ⎡⎛ ∣            ∣          ∣        ∣    ⎞       ⎛    ∣                  ∣          ∣              ∣             ⎞⎤
                 ⎢⎜                                       ⎟       ⎜𝐔               𝐔𝝁|                  𝐔𝝁|                     ⎟⎥
        𝐴train = ⎢⎜ 𝐔𝝁1 ,𝑡1    𝐔𝝁1 ,𝑡2      …    𝐔𝝁1 ,𝑡𝑁
                                                       𝝁1 ⎟
                                                            , … , ⎜ |train |,𝑡1
                                                                     𝝁                         |,𝑡
                                                                                          train 2
                                                                                                     …               |,𝑡
                                                                                                                train 𝑁𝝁|train | ⎟⎥
                                                                                                                                     ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train
                 ⎢⎜ ∣               ∣        ∣       ∣    ⎟       ⎜                                                               ⎟⎥
                 ⎣⎝                                       ⎠       ⎝    ∣                  ∣          ∣              ∣             ⎠⎦
with |train | = 𝑛train and 𝐔𝝁,𝑡        ∈ ℝ𝑑 for all (𝝁, 𝑡) ∈ 
                                                   train × 𝑇𝝁 . In our case, we do not assemble 𝐴train since the computational domain
can be partitioned and assigned to diﬀerent processors during the evaluation of the full-order training solutions train .
    We represent with 𝑀 ∈ ℕ the number of cells 𝑇 ⊂ Ωℎ of the mesh {𝑇𝑖 }𝑀   𝑖=1
                                                                                ⊂  representing our discretized computational domain,
and with 𝑐 ∈ ℕ the sum of the dimensions of the physical fields we are approximating: for the CNS (subsection 5.1) test case 𝑐 = 6
for the INS ((subsection 5.2)) 𝑐 = 5. Since we employ the FVM, the total number of degrees of freedom (dofs) is 𝑑 = 𝑐 ⋅ 𝑀 .
    For example, for the CNS test case 𝑐 = 6 we consider velocity 𝐮𝝁,𝑡 ∈ ℝ3𝑀 , density 𝜌𝝁,𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑀 , internal energy 𝑒𝝁,𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑀 and
pressure 𝑝𝝁,𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑀 , so that

        𝑈𝝁,𝑡 = (𝐮𝝁,𝑡 , 𝜌𝝁,𝑡 , 𝑒𝝁,𝑡 , 𝑝𝝁,𝑡 ) ∈ ℝ𝑀×𝑐 = ℝ𝑑 .


                                                                              6
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                          Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
Similarly, for the INS test case 𝑐 = 5 we consider velocity 𝐮𝝁,𝑡 ∈ ℝ3𝑀 , pressure 𝑝𝝁,𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑀 and the turbulence viscosity 𝜈𝝁,𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑀 , so
that

        𝑈𝝁,𝑡 = (𝐮𝝁,𝑡 , 𝑝𝝁,𝑡 , 𝜈𝝁,𝑡 ) ∈ ℝ𝑀×𝑐 = ℝ𝑑 .
  The vector of cell-wise measures 𝐕 ∈ ℝ𝑑 is assembled from the vector 𝐯 = {Lebesgue (𝑇𝑖 )}𝑀    𝑖=1
                                                                                                     where Lebesgue is the Lebesgue
measure in 𝑅𝐷 ⊃ Ωℎ . So that 𝐕 = (𝐯)𝑐𝑖=1 ∈ ℝ𝑑 is formed stacking 𝐯 𝑐 -times. The physical normalization field 𝐍 ∈ ℝ𝑑 is obtained from
the maximum 𝐿2 -norm of each field: for the CNS test case we have

        𝑢max = max‖𝐮𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,               𝜌max = max‖𝜌𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,         𝑒max = max‖𝑒𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,        𝑝max = max‖𝑝𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,
                    𝝁,𝑡                               𝝁,𝑡                         𝝁,𝑡                        𝝁,𝑡

so that 𝐍 = (𝟏3𝑀 ⋅ 𝑢max , 𝟏𝑀 ⋅ 𝜌max , 𝟏𝑀 ⋅ 𝑒max , 𝟏𝑀 ⋅ 𝑝max                  ) ∈ ℝ𝑑 , with 𝟏      𝑀 the 𝑀 -dimensional vector of ones. Similarly, for the INS test
case we consider

        𝑢max = max‖𝐮𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,               𝜌max = max‖𝜌𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,         𝑒max = max‖𝑒𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,        𝑝max = max‖𝑝𝝁,𝑡 ‖2 ,
                    𝝁,𝑡                               𝝁,𝑡                         𝝁,𝑡                        𝝁,𝑡

so that 𝐍 = (𝟏3𝑀 ⋅ 𝑢max , 𝟏𝑀 ⋅ 𝑝max , 𝟏𝑀 ⋅ 𝜈max ) ∈ ℝ𝑑 .
    So, applying this normalization, the columns {𝐴train 𝝁,𝑡 }(𝝁,𝑡)∈train ×𝑇𝝁 of 𝐴train are actually d­fined as

        ℝ𝑑 ∋ 𝐴train
              𝝁,𝑡 = 𝐔𝝁,𝑡 ⊘ 𝐖,                         𝐖 = 𝐍 ⊘ 𝐕,                                                                                                           (7)

where we have considered only element-wise divisions ∙ ⊘ ∙ between vectors in ℝ𝑑 . Notice that in this way we obtain unit-less states
𝐔𝝁,𝑡 ⊘ 𝐖 ∈ ℝ𝑑 . For the impact of physical normalization in model order reduction, see [33].


  Algorithm 1: Parallelized Randomized Singular Value Decomposition.
input : training column-wise ordered snapshots matrix 𝐴train ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train ,
        𝑟rSVD reduced rSVD dimension, 𝑝 oversampling parameter
output: 𝑈 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑟rSVD rSVD modes
 1 D­fine the sketch dimension 𝑙 = 𝑟rSVD + 𝑝.
 2 Draw the sketch matrix Ω ∈ ℝ𝑛train ×𝑙 as a Gaussian random matrix.
 3 Assemble in parallel 𝑌 = 𝐴train Ω, with 𝑌 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑙 .
 4 Evaluate the orthonormal basis 𝑄 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑙 using 𝑄𝑅-factorization 𝑌 = 𝑄𝑅, with 𝑅 ∈ ℝ𝑙×𝑙 .
 5 Project the snapshots into a random lower 𝑙 -dimensional space in parallel: 𝑆 = 𝑄𝑇 𝐴train , with 𝑆 ∈ ℝ𝑙×𝑛train .
 6 Compute the thin SVD 𝑆 = 𝑈̃ Σ  ̃ 𝑉̃ , with 𝑈̃ ∈ ℝ𝑙×𝑟rSVD , Σ ∈ ℝ𝑟rSVD ×𝑟rSVD , 𝑉̃ ∈ ℝ𝑟rSVD ×𝑛train .
 7 Evaluate the rSVD modes 𝑈 = 𝑄𝑈̃ , with 𝑈 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑟rSVD .



    The reduced train and test rSVD coordinates are obtained with the following linear projection, employing the rSVD modes 𝑈 ∈
ℝ𝑑×𝑟rSVD from Algorithm 1:

        ℝ𝑟rSVD ×𝑛train ∋ 𝑌train = 𝑈 𝑇 𝐴train ,                               (reduced train rSVD coordinates)
              𝑟rSVD ×𝑛test                    𝑇
          ℝ                  ∋ 𝑌test = 𝑈 𝐴test ,                              (reduced test rSVD coordinates)
and the reconstructed train and test fields are obtained employing the normalizing vector 𝐖 = 𝐍 ⊘ 𝐕:

        ℝ𝑑×𝑛train ∋ 𝐴rec
                     train
                           = 𝐖 ⊙ 𝑈 𝑌train = 𝐖 ⊙ 𝑈 𝑈 𝑇 𝐴train ,                                        (reconstructed train snapshots)
              𝑑×𝑛test                                  𝑇
          ℝ             ∋ 𝐴rec
                           test = 𝐖 ⊙ 𝑈 𝑌test = 𝐖 ⊙ 𝑈 𝑈 𝐴test ,                                        (reconstructed test snapshots)
where ⊙ is the Hadamard columns-wise product, inverse operation of the normalization applied in (7).
   To decide if the number of rSVD modes is suﬃcient to achieve the desired accuracy for the problem at hand we consider the mean
and max relative 𝐿2 reconstruction error on the training and test sets:

                                       1          ∑            ‖𝐔rec,
                                                                 𝝁,𝑡
                                                                      train
                                                                            − 𝐔train
                                                                               𝝁,𝑡 ‖2                                                      ‖𝐔rec,
                                                                                                                                             𝝁,𝑡
                                                                                                                                                  train
                                                                                                                                                        − 𝐔train
                                                                                                                                                           𝝁,𝑡 ‖2
        ‖𝐴rec  ‖
          train 2,𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛
                       =                                                                  ,          ‖𝐴rec  ‖
                                                                                                       train 2,𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                                                                                                   =         max                                     ,   (10a)
                                  𝑛train (𝝁,𝑡)∈                     ‖𝐔train
                                                                       𝝁,𝑡 ‖2
                                                                                                                        (𝝁,𝑡)∈train ×𝑇𝝁         ‖𝐔train
                                                                                                                                                   𝝁,𝑡 ‖2
                                                   train ×𝑇𝝁


                                       1          ∑          ‖𝐔rec,
                                                               𝝁,𝑡
                                                                    test
                                                                         − 𝐔test
                                                                            𝝁,𝑡 ‖2                                                       ‖𝐔rec,
                                                                                                                                           𝝁,𝑡
                                                                                                                                                test
                                                                                                                                                     − 𝐔test
                                                                                                                                                        𝝁,𝑡 ‖2
         ‖𝐴rec
           test ‖2,𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 =                                                            ,               ‖𝐴rec
                                                                                                       test ‖2,𝑚𝑎𝑥 =       max                                   ,       (10b)
                                  𝑛test (𝝁,𝑡)∈                   ‖𝐔test
                                                                    𝝁,𝑡 ‖2
                                                                                                                       (𝝁,𝑡)∈test ×𝑇𝝁        ‖𝐔test
                                                                                                                                                𝝁,𝑡 ‖2
                                                  test ×𝑇𝝁


where 𝐴rec
       train
             = (𝐔𝝁,𝑡      rec, train
                                       )(𝝁,𝑡)∈train ×𝑇𝝁 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train and 𝐴rec      rec, test
                                                                          test = (𝐔𝝁,𝑡       )(𝝁,𝑡)∈test ×𝑇𝝁 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛test .
    Finally, we want to explicitly d­fine the filtering/transform map 𝑓ﬁlter ∶ 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 → ℝ𝑝 and its approximate left inverse 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                                                                              −1 ∶

ℝ𝑝 → 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 with 𝑝 = 𝑟rSVD :
                       (      )
     𝑓ﬁlter (𝐔ℎ ) = 𝑈 𝑇 𝐔ℎ ⊘ 𝐖 ,                       𝑓ﬁlter
                                                        −1
                                                              (𝐔̃ ℎ ) = (𝐖 ⊙ 𝑈 ) 𝐔̃ ℎ ,                                                                                   (11)


                                                                                              7
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                     Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
we remark the diﬀerence between the state vector 𝐔ℎ ∈ ℝ𝑑 , the vector of frequencies 𝐔̃ ℎ ∈ ℝ𝑝 , 𝑝 ≪ 𝑑 , and the rSVD modes 𝑈 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑝 .

3. Hyper-reduction

    As introduced in section 2.1, there are two main problematics that aﬀect the eﬃcient resolution of the nonlinear least squares
problem in equation (6a) at each time instance 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇𝝁 and for each 𝑖-th intermediate optimization step required by the nonlinear
least-squares method, and they are both linked to the evaluation of the residual

        𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝜙(𝐳), {𝜙(𝐳𝑠 )}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 ).
We recall that we employ the derivative-free Pounders solver [19] implemented in PETSc [20]. Also nonlinear least-squares problem
optimizers that employ an approximation or the true Jacobian of the residual 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 can be employed.
   The main problematics to eﬃciently evaluate 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 are the following:

 1. in general, the nonlinearity of 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 makes its evaluation dependent on the number of dofs 𝑑 ,
 2. the map 𝜙 ∶ 𝑈 ⊂ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑑 might be computationally heavy to evaluate for each 𝑟-dimensional input and depends on the number
    of dofs since its output is 𝑑 -dimensional.

The reason why we need this independence of the number of dofs is for our model order reduction procedure to be eﬃcient even
when 𝑑 increases. Our two test cases 𝐶𝑁𝑆 and 𝐼𝑁𝑆 have approximately 𝑀 = 30000 and 𝑀 = 200000 cells, and 𝑑 = 180000 and
𝑑 = 1000000 dofs respectively, which are still a moderate number of dofs compared to real applications. If we want to extend the
methodology to larger meshes, we have to guarantee the independence on the number of dofs of our procedure.
    We will address first the nonlinearity coming from 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 . Typically, in the case of LM-LSPG, if the residual has a nonlinear term
directly coming from the parametric PDE model, a class of methods under the name of hyper-reduction can be applied to ameliorate
the situation. The idea is to reconstruct the residual only from its evaluations on a subset of degrees of freedom. To do so, the values
of the physical fields have to be computed on the stencil needed by the numerical discretization.
    The simplest approach consists in collocating the residual on a subset of cells of the mesh, from now on called nodes or magic
points. So we introduce two projection maps: the projection onto the magic points
                                                                           𝑇
                                            ⎛ ∣       ∣        ∣     ∣ ⎞
        𝑃𝑟 ℎ ∶ ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ 𝑟 ℎ ,    𝑃𝑟ℎ (𝐔ℎ ) = ⎜ 𝐞𝑖1    𝐞𝑖2       …   𝐞𝑖𝑟 ⎟ ∈ ℝ𝑟ℎ ×𝑑 ,   0 < 𝑟ℎ ≪ 𝑑
                                            ⎜                         ℎ ⎟
                                            ⎝ ∣       ∣        ∣     ∣ ⎠
                      𝑟
                   ℎ
where 𝑆𝑟ℎ = {𝐞𝑖𝑗 }𝑗=1 is a subset of the standard basis of ℝ𝑑 and the projection onto the submesh needed to evaluate the residual on
the magic points
                                                                       𝑇
                                              ⎛ ∣    ∣         ∣    ∣ ⎞
        𝑃𝑟𝑠 ∶ ℝ𝑑 → ℝ𝑠 ,        𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝐔ℎ ) = ⎜ 𝐞𝑖1    𝐞𝑖2        …   𝐞𝑖𝑠 ⎟ ∈ ℝ𝑠×𝑑 ,   0 < 𝑟ℎ < 𝑠 ≪ 𝑑
          ℎ                      ℎ         ⎜                           ⎟
                                              ⎝ ∣    ∣         ∣    ∣ ⎠
where 𝑆𝑟𝑠 = {𝐞𝑖𝑗 }𝑠𝑗=1 is a subset of the standard basis of ℝ𝑑 containing both 𝑆𝑟ℎ and 𝑆𝑟𝑠 , with 𝑆𝑟ℎ ⊂ 𝑆𝑟𝑠 .
         ℎ                                                                                ℎ                ℎ
  With these deﬁnitions the residual from equation (6a) can be hyper-reduced as

        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ                                                                          (12a)
                                          ℎ                ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

           = argmin ‖𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, (𝑃𝑟𝑠 ◦ 𝑓ﬁlter
                                           −1      ̃
                                                 )(𝜙(𝐳)), {(𝑃𝑟𝑠 ◦ 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                   −1      ̃ 𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼 )‖2 𝑟 ,
                                                                         )(𝜙(𝐳                                                                    (12b)
                                          ℎ                           ℎ              𝑡  ℝℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

where we have employed the deﬁnitions of 𝜙̃ ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑝 and 𝑓ﬁlter  −1 ∶ ℝ𝑝 → ℝ𝑑 from section 2.2. We employed the same notation 𝐳𝑡

for the latent variable as in Equation (6a) even if they are the solutions of two diﬀerent minimization problems.
    In this way we have addressed the problem coming from the nonlinearity of the residual 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 . At the same time, thanks to the
                 −1 ◦ 𝜙̃ as composition of a linear projection depending on the dofs 𝑓 −1 and a small nonlinear neural network 𝜙̃
choice of 𝜙 = 𝑓ﬁlter                                                                     ﬁlter
independent on the number of dofs, we have also tackled the second problem. In fact, also the parametrization map (𝑃𝑟𝑠 ◦ 𝑓ﬁlter ̃
                                                                                                                          −1 )(𝜙)
                                                                                                                     ℎ
restricted to the submesh is now independent on the number of dofs.
    To be more specific, since we will be employing only rSVD as linear projections we have
                              (             ) (                  )
        𝑓ﬁlter
         −1
               (𝐔̃ ℎ ) = 𝑃𝑟𝑠 ◦ (𝐖 ⊙ 𝑈 ) 𝐔̃ ℎ = 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝐖) ⊙ 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝑈 ) 𝐔̃ ℎ ,                                                                            (13)
                          ℎ                                ℎ           ℎ

where we have employed deﬁnition (11). So the hyper-reduction aﬀects only the rSVD modes 𝑈 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑝 and the normalization vector
𝐖 ∈ ℝ𝑑 . A schematic representation of the hyper-reduced approximate nonlinear manifold parametrization map is shown in Fig. 3.
   We want to remark that the hyper-reduction procedure presented is eﬀective thanks to the choice of implementation of the
parametrization map 𝜙 through a combination of neural networks and rSVD modes. However, in some cases the number of rSVD
modes required 𝑝 = 𝑟rSVD can become so large to guarantee a threshold accuracy in the relative 𝐿2 reconstruction error that the


                                                                               8
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 3. Left: the decoder map 𝜙̃ ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑝 followed by the vector matrix multiplication with the rSVD modes 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                                                                −1
                                                                                                                   (𝐔̃ ℎ ) ∶ ℝ𝑝 → 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 . The latter are restricted to
the submesh through the projection 𝑃𝑟𝑠 ∶ 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 → ℝ𝑠 , that is the blackened dofs are discarded. Right: the map actually employed in the hyper-reduced nonlinear
                                       ℎ
manifold least-squares Petrov-Galerkin method 𝜙 ∶ ℝ𝑟 → 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝑋ℎ ) ∼ ℝ𝑠 . It is independent on the number of dofs and its evaluation is eﬃcient thanks to the relatively
                                                          ℎ
small size of the decoder 𝜓̃ .



methodology is no more eﬃcient, since 𝑝 ≫ 0 and 𝜙̃ ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑟rSVD = ℝ𝑝 . This computational burden aﬀects both the oﬄine stage
for the training of the NN and the online residual evaluation. In these cases, one may want to employ heavier and generic deep
neural networks like CNNs for structured meshes or GNNs for unstructured meshes that recover a good approximation of the solution
manifold. The employment of these deep NNs brings up the problem of how to hyper-reduce them. The methodology introduced in
this section cannot be applied, but a solution is represented by a strategy called teacher-student training for which in a following
training phase a smaller fast student NN is tuned to replicate the results of the bigger slow teacher NN. This alternative approach is
presented and studied in [9].

3.1. Hyper-reduction methods and magic points selection algorithms

     We are left with the task of defining the set of magic points 𝑆𝑟ℎ , since the submesh 𝑆𝑠 ⊃ 𝑆𝑟ℎ is ident­fied from the magic points
and the choice of numerical scheme employed to discretize the parametric PDE. Until now, we have considered only the collocation
of the residual on the magic points as hyper-reduction method. However, not only this is not the sole possible implementation but
also not the most common one.
     What we have actually described is part of the reduced over-collocation hyper-reduction method [10]. In this section, we will intro­
duce also the gappy discrete empirical interpolation method (DEIM) [34], the energy-sampling and weighting method (ECSW) [13],
and DEIM with the quasi-optimal point selection algorithm (S-OPT) from [35].
     We have experimentally observed that for our test cases with slow Kolmogorov n-width and 𝑟rSVD = 150 and 𝑟rSVD = 300 rSVD
modes, the reduced over-collocation method performs better. For more comments see section 6. Moreover, for test cases with a bigger
number of dofs we have also developed a more successful adaptive magic points selection method introduced in section 3.2.
     So, what we will be particularly focused on are the magic points selection algorithms from DEIM, ECSW and S-OPT. The starting
point for each one of them is the computation of a set of rSVD modes 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 . Since we are hyper-reducing the residual
𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 we need to collect a dataset of residual snapshots train = {𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝐔𝑡ℎ , {𝐔𝑠ℎ }𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )}(𝝁,𝑡)∈train ×𝑇𝝁 = {𝐺𝝁,𝑡 }(𝝁,𝑡)∈train ×𝑇𝝁 , with 𝑇𝝁 =
{𝑡1 , … , 𝑡𝑁𝝁 }, in the training phase and compress them with rSVD:

                 ⎡⎛ ∣             ∣       ∣         ∣     ⎞       ⎛    ∣                    ∣           ∣               ∣                 ⎞⎤
                 ⎢⎜                                       ⎟       ⎜𝐺                 𝐺𝝁|                   𝐺𝝁|                          ⎟⎥
        𝐺train = ⎢⎜ 𝐺𝝁1 ,𝑡1     𝐺𝝁2 ,𝑡1   …     𝐺𝝁1 ,𝑡𝑁
                                                       𝝁1 ⎟
                                                            , … , ⎜ |train | ,𝑡1
                                                                     𝝁                             ,𝑡
                                                                                            train | 1
                                                                                                        …                 ,𝑡
                                                                                                                   train | 𝑁𝝁   |train | ⎟⎥
                                                                                                                                             ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train ,
                 ⎢⎜ ∣               ∣      ∣         ∣    ⎟       ⎜                                                                       ⎟⎥
                 ⎣⎝                                       ⎠       ⎝    ∣                    ∣           ∣               ∣                 ⎠⎦
from this residual snapshots matrix 𝐺train the rSVD modes are computed 𝑈𝐺 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑟ℎ𝑟 and utilized for magic points sampling after
setting 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈𝐺 . In this case, 𝑛ℎ𝑟 might possibly be diﬀerent than 𝑟rSVD .
    However, employing the physical fields’ rSVD modes 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑟rSVD also to perform the magic points’ sampling is a fast
alternative [36], since no additional residual snapshots need to be collected, apart from those used to d­fine the map 𝜙. Thus, the
computational cost of an additional application of the rSVD algorithm, this time on the residual snapshots, is avoided.
    We remark that 𝑑 > 𝑛ℎ𝑟 is the number of hyper-reduction modes 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 , 𝑠 is the cardinality of the submesh, and 𝑟ℎ is the
number of magic points 𝑠 > 𝑟ℎ .


                                                                                9
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                     Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
3.1.1. Gappy discrete empirical interpolation
    In the gappy DEIM algorithm, after the computation of the hyper-reduction basis 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 from the physical fields 𝐴train ∈
ℝ𝑑×𝑛train or residual snapshots 𝐺train ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train , 𝑈ℎ𝑟 is employed to find the magic points with a greedy algorithm: at each step, it is
selected the cell of the mesh associated to the highest value of the hyper-reduction reconstruction error 𝐫 ∈ ℝ𝑑

        𝐫 = 𝐴train − 𝑈 (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈 )† (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐴train ),             or   𝐫 = 𝐺train − 𝑈𝐺 (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈𝐺 )† (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺train )

where with the notation (∙)† we represent the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse matrix and 𝑃𝑟ℎ ∈ ℝ𝑑×̃𝑟 is the intermediate projection
matrix that evaluates a vector on the full-state space ℝ𝑑 on the magic points 𝑆𝑟ℎ = {𝐞𝑖𝑗 }𝑟𝑗=1
                                                                                           ̃ , 0 < 𝑟̃ ≤ 𝑟 , selected up to the considered
                                                                                                         ℎ
step of the greedy algorithm. We remark that if vector-valued states 𝐔 ∈ ℝ𝑑 with 𝑑 = 𝑀 ⋅ 𝑐 , 𝑐 > 1 are considered, it is selected the
cell of the mesh that maximizes the sum over each of the 𝑐 fields of the hyper-reduction reconstruction error.
    For our implementation of the gappy DEIM greedy nodes selection algorithm, we have chosen the one studied in [8] and applied
to the Gauss-Newton tensor approximation (GNAT) hyper-reduction method that is more general than DEIM.
                                          𝑟ℎ
    Once the magic points set 𝑆𝑟ℎ = {𝐞𝑖𝑗 }𝑗=1 has been evaluated, the magic points and submesh projections 𝑃𝑟ℎ , 𝑃𝑟𝑠 are computed
                                                                                                                    ℎ
and the following variants of nonlinear hyper-reduced least-squares problem (6a) are solved for
                              (                                                      )
        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖(𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈 )† 𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 ) ⊘ 𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐖 ‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,                                  (FB-DEIM)                          (14a)
                                                        ℎ              ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟
                                    (                                                          )
        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖(𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈𝐺 )†         𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 ) ⊘ 𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐖𝐺 ‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,                        (RB-DEIM)                          (14b)
                                                            ℎ              ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,                                                      (C-DEIM),                          (14c)
                                             ℎ              ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

depending on the choice of hyper-reduction basis chosen 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈 (FB-DEIM) or 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈𝐺 (RB-DEIM) or if it is performed reduced
over-collocation (C-DEIM). In the case of FB-DEIM and RB-DEIM, the residuals 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 are divided element-wise by the normalization
vectors 𝐖 ∈ ℝ𝑑 d­fined in (7) and 𝐖𝐺 ∈ ℝ𝑑 d­fined analogously from 𝐺train .

3.1.2. A quasi-optimal nodes sampling method
   As pointed out in [35], the matrix 𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑟ℎ ×𝑛ℎ𝑟 from the DEIM algorithm loses the orthogonality of its columns with respect
to 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 that is crucial for the numerical stability of DEIM and to minimize the error in the 𝐿2 -norm of the hyper-reduction
interpolation. In fact, the hyper-reduction 𝐿2 error can be decomposed [34] as the sum of the best approximation error on the linear
subspace in ℝ𝑑 spanned by the columns of 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 and the distance from the projection onto it

        ‖𝐴train − 𝑈ℎ𝑟 (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )† (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐴train )‖22 =
                                  𝑇                     𝑇
                 = ‖𝐴train − 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝐴train ‖22 + ‖𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝐴train − 𝑈ℎ𝑟 (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )† (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐴train )‖22
                                  𝑇                                          𝑇
                 = ‖𝐴train − 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝐴train ‖22 + ‖𝑈ℎ𝑟 (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )† 𝑃𝑟ℎ (𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 − 𝐼𝑑 )𝐴train ‖22
                                  𝑇                                      𝑇
                 = ‖𝐴train − 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝐴train ‖22 + ‖(𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )† 𝑃𝑟ℎ (𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 − 𝐼𝑑 )𝐴train ‖22 ,

where in the last step we have used the fact that 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 has orthonormal columns. Only the second term depends on the magic
points selection, so the optimal strategy would be to minimize the solution of the least-squares problem

                              𝑇                                                       𝑇
        (𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )† 𝑃𝑟ℎ (𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 − 𝐼𝑑 )𝐴train =         argmin ‖𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑋 − 𝑃𝑟ℎ (𝑈ℎ𝑟 𝑈ℎ𝑟 − 𝐼𝑑 )𝐴train ‖22 ,                                                         (16)
                                                      𝑋∈ℝ𝑛ℎ𝑟 ×𝑛train

that is to minimize the hyper-reduction 𝐿2 error of the remaining part of 𝐴train ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train after the diﬀerence with its projection on
the subspace spanned by the hyper-reduction basis 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 .
   A possible way, not necessarily optimal, to minimize (16) is to maximize the determinant of 𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑟ℎ ×𝑟ℎ𝑟 and at the same
time maximize its column orthogonality. In [37], they developed an eﬃcient greedy algorithm to do so, maximizing

                                                                 √         (
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                               ) ⎞ 𝑛ℎ𝑟
                                                             ⎛
                                                             ⎜    det (𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )𝑇 𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ⎟
        𝑃𝑟𝑆 = argmax (𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ),                  (𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ) = ⎜       ∏𝑛ℎ𝑟                        ⎟       ∈ [0, 1],
           ℎ
                𝑃 ∈ℝ𝑟ℎ ×𝑛ℎ𝑟                                  ⎜         𝑖       ‖(𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )𝑖 ‖2     ⎟
                                                             ⎝                                   ⎠
                      𝑟
                   𝑟ℎ
where {(𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )𝑖 }𝑖=1 are the columns of 𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑟ℎ ×𝑛ℎ𝑟 , assuming ‖(𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 )𝑖 ‖2 ≠ 0, ∀𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑛ℎ𝑟 }. In particular, in [37] it is proved
that (𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ) = 1 if and only if the columns of 𝑃 𝑈ℎ𝑟 are mutually orthonormal. The same quasi-optimal criterion is employed for
hyper-reduction in [35], under the name of S-optimality (SOPT).
   The DEIM algorithm with S-optimality magic points selection has the following formulation:
                              (                                                          )
        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖(𝑃𝑟𝑆 𝑈 )† 𝑃𝑟𝑆 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑆,𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑆,𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 ) ⊘ 𝑃𝑟𝑆 𝐖 ‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,                           (FB-DEIM-SOPT)                        (17a)
                              ℎ          ℎ              ℎ                  ℎ                             ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟
                                    (                                                              )
        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖(𝑃𝑟𝑆 𝑈𝐺 )†         𝑃𝑟𝑆 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑆,𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑆,𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 ) ⊘ 𝑃𝑟𝑆 𝐖𝐺 ‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,                 (RB-DEIM-SOPT)                        (17b)
                              ℎ              ℎ              ℎ                  ℎ                             ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟


                                                                                     10
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                       Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝑃𝑟𝑆 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑆,𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑆,𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,                                  (C-DEIM-SOPT)                        (17c)
                           ℎ               ℎ               ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

where 𝑃𝑟𝑆,𝑠
         ℎ
            ∈ ℝ𝑠×𝑑 is the submesh projection corresponding to 𝑃𝑟𝑆 ∈ ℝ𝑟ℎ ×𝑑 . Also in this case, depending on the choice of hyper­
                                                                ℎ
reduction basis chosen 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈 (FB-DEIM-SOPT) or 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈𝐺 (RB-DEIM-SOPT) or if it is performed reduced over-collocation (C­
DEIM-SOPT), there are three diﬀerent formulations.

3.1.3. Energy-conserving sampling and weighting method
    Diﬀerently from DEIM, the ECSW hyper-reduction method finds a sparse integration formula to approximate residual 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 , that
is indeed obtained through an integration on the computational domain Ω ⊂ ℝ𝐷 , for the FVM, FEM or DGM.
    The idea is to find a ‖∙‖0 -sparse quadrature formula (‖𝐱‖0 = #{𝑖 ∈ ℕ|𝐱𝑖 ≠ 0}, ∀ ∈ ℝ𝑑 ) such that the new weights 𝐐ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑 are
sparse ‖𝐐ℎ𝑟 ‖0 ≪ 1 and approximate up to a tolerance 0 < 𝜏 ≪ 1 the sums of the training residual snapshots:

        𝐐ℎ𝑟 = argmin‖𝐐‖0            s.t.   ‖𝐐 ⊙ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 − 𝐜‖22 < 𝜏‖𝐜‖22
                 𝐐∈ℝ𝑑+

where 𝐐 ⊙ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 is the element-wise multiplication of the quadrature weights vector 𝐐 ∈ ℝ𝑑 with the columns of the training residual
                                                   ∑𝑑
snapshots matrix 𝑈ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛ℎ𝑟 , and 𝐜 ∈ ℝ𝑛ℎ𝑟 , 𝐜𝑗 = 𝑖=1 (𝑈ℎ𝑟 )𝑖𝑗 , ∀𝑗 ∈ {1, … , 𝑛ℎ𝑟 } is the vector of integrals. With the notation ℝ𝑑+ we
consider the set of non-negative 𝑑 -dimensional vectors. In practice, this NP-hard problem is relaxed to the following non-negative
least-squares problem

        𝐐𝑟ℎ = argmin‖𝐐 ⊙ 𝑈ℎ𝑟 − 𝐜‖22 ,
                 𝐐∈ℝ𝑑+

we solve it with the non-negative least-squares algorithm based on [38] and implemented in the Eigen library [39].
   The nonlinear manifold least-squares problem (4a), are hyper-reduced with the ECSW method in the following formulations:
                           (                                                   )
                     ̃ ℎ𝑟 ⊙ 𝑃𝑟 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃 𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃 𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼 ) ⊘ 𝑃𝑟 𝐖 ‖2 𝑟 ,
        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝐐                                                                                        (FB-ECSW)                             (18a)
                              ℎ           𝑟        ℎ   𝑟       ℎ      𝑡      ℎ   ℝℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟
                                    (                                                       )
                     ̃ ℎ𝑟 ⊙ 𝑃𝑟 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃 𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃 𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼 ) ⊘ 𝑃𝑟 𝐖𝐺 ‖2 𝑟 ,
        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝐐                                                                                       (RB-ECSW)                              (18b)
                              ℎ           𝑟        ℎ   𝑟       ℎ      𝑡      ℎ    ℝℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,                                    (C-ECSW),                              (18c)
                                           ℎ           ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

where 𝐐 ̃ ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑟ℎ is the quadrature weights vector obtained from the restriction of 𝐐ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑 to its non-zero entries. We also d­fine
                                                                                        ̃ ℎ𝑟 = 𝑃𝑟 𝐐ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑 , and as a consequence the
𝑃𝑟ℎ ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑟ℎ as the boolean matrix that selects the non-zero entries of 𝐐ℎ𝑟 ∈ ℝ𝑑 so that 𝐐        ℎ
                                𝑠
projection onto the submesh 𝑃𝑟 ∈ ℝ .  𝑑×𝑠
                                ℎ
    Also for this case, depending on the choice of hyper-reduction basis chosen 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈 (FB-ECSW) or 𝑈ℎ𝑟 = 𝑈𝐺 (RB-ECSW) or if it
is performed reduced over-collocation (C-ECSW), there are three diﬀerent formulations.

3.2. Gradient-based adaptive hyper-reduction

    The most successful hyper-reduction strategy for our implementation of the NM-LSPG method is the adaptive reduced over­
collocation method (C-UP) that we introduce now. For comments on the results see section 6. The method employs the standard
formulation of the reduced over-collocation hyper-reduction method

        𝐳𝑡 = argmin ‖𝑃𝑟ℎ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳)), {𝑃𝑟𝑠 (𝜙(𝐳𝑠 ))}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 )‖2ℝ𝑟ℎ ,         (C-UP)
                                           ℎ           ℎ
               𝐳∈ℝ𝑟

with the diﬀerence that the magic points are sampled adaptively every 𝑛 time-steps, minimizing the indicator d­fined in equation (20),
during the time-evolution of the NM-LSPG trajectories. For simplicity, our choice of 𝑛 is fixed. Its cost is amortized over the successive
NM-LSPG time evaluations.
   A heuristic approach relies on the positioning of the magic points where the sensitivities of the residual at time 𝑡 have greater
components in 𝐿2 -norm. If we d­fine the residual map at time 𝑡

        ℝ𝑟 ∋ 𝐳 ↦ 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝝁, 𝜙(𝐳), {𝜙(𝐳𝑠 )}𝑠∈𝐼𝑡 ) = 𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝜙(𝐳)) ∈ ℝ𝑑 ,            𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑑 ,
losing for brevity the dependencies on the previous time steps, its sensitivities with respect to the latent coordinate 𝐳𝑡 at time 𝑡 are
for all 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑟},
                                           [                             ]       [            ]
                    𝜕𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝜙(𝐳)) ||          𝜕𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝜙(𝐳)) ||                     𝜕𝜙(𝐳) ||
        ℝ𝑑 ∋ 𝐉𝑖 =                  |     =                   |                ◦
                        𝜕𝐳𝑖        | 𝑡
                                   |𝐳=𝐳             𝜕𝝓       |
                                                             |𝜙(𝐳)=𝜙(𝐳𝑡 ) 𝑑×𝑑       𝜕𝐳𝑖 ||𝐳=𝐳𝑡 𝑑×1
                    [                             ]                         [              ]
                      𝜕𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝜙(𝐳)) ||                 [ −1 ]                    ̃ ||
                                                                              𝜕 𝜙(𝐳)
                  =                  |                ◦ 𝑓ﬁlter            ◦          |
                           𝜕𝝓        |                           𝑑×𝑟rSVD        𝜕𝐳𝑖 ||𝐳=𝐳𝑡
                                     |𝜙(𝐳)=𝜙(𝐳𝑡 )   𝑑×𝑑                                     𝑟rSVD ×1



                                                                          11
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                                    Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
                                             [ ]
                          = [𝐆]𝑑×𝑑 [𝐅]𝑑×𝑟rSVD 𝚽𝑖 𝑟
                                                                 rSVD ×1

with
                    𝜕𝐺ℎ,𝛿𝑡 (𝜙(𝐳)) ||                                                                                       ̃ ||
                                                                                                                         𝜕 𝜙(𝐳)
        𝐆=                         |            ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑 ,                 𝐅 = 𝑃𝑟𝑠 ◦ 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                                    −1
                                                                                          ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑟rSVD ,           𝚽=             |    ∈ ℝ𝑟rSVD ×𝑟
                        𝜕𝝓         |                                               ℎ                                       𝜕𝐳 ||𝐳=𝐳𝑡
                                   |𝜙(𝐳)=𝜙(𝐳𝑡 )
where with the chain rule we have highlighted the terms that compose the evaluation of the Jacobian matrix of the residual.
   The exact evaluation of the Jacobian 𝚽 ∈ ℝ𝑟rSVD ×𝑟 of the parametrization map 𝜙̃ ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑟rSVD is eﬃcient enough to be employed
by our adaptive hyper-reduction procedure. However, the matrix multiplication 𝐆𝐅𝚽 is ineﬃcient since 𝐆 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑 depends on the
number of degrees of freedom and the submesh size 𝑑 .
   Our solution consists instead in evaluating 𝑂 ∶ 𝑈 ⊂ ℝ𝑟 ×  → ℝ𝑑×𝑟 ,
                                        (                                              )                         [                                 ]
                𝑡
                                              ̃ ||
                                            𝜕 𝜙(𝐳)          ̃ ||
                                                          𝜕 𝜙(𝐳)                                                       ̃ ||
                                                                                                                     𝜕 𝜙(𝐳)          ̃ ||
                                                                                                                                   𝜕 𝜙(𝐳)
        𝑂(𝐳 , 𝝁) = 𝑓ﬁlter ◦    −1
                                                   |    −        |                           = [𝐖 ⊙ 𝑈 ]𝑑×𝑟rSVD              |    −        |                   ,
                                              𝜕𝐳 ||𝐳=𝐳𝑡     𝜕𝐳 ||𝐳=𝐳𝑡−1                                                𝜕𝐳 ||𝐳=𝐳𝑡     𝜕𝐳 ||𝐳=𝐳𝑡−1
                                                                                                                                                   𝑟rSVD ×𝑟

considering the current time-step 𝑡 and the previous one 𝑡 − 1. In this way, we are employing the sensitivities of the neural network
itself, rather then including also the information coming from the residual through the Jacobian 𝐆 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑 . The impact of neglecting
the Jacobian is left for future studies.
    We select only the first 𝑟ℎ cells of the computational domain that maximize
                            ( 𝑐              )
                  ⎛          ∑                   ⎞
                  ⎜
         argmax argmax                𝑡
                                 𝑂𝑖 (𝐳 , 𝝁)2     ⎟                                                                                                                                 (20)
        𝑘={1,…,𝑀} ⎜ 𝑗=1,…,𝑟                      ⎟
                  ⎝          𝑖=1              𝑘𝑗 ⎠

where 𝑂𝑖 (𝐳𝑡 , 𝝁) ∈ ℝ𝑀 for 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑐} are the degrees of freedom corresponding to the 𝑖-th physical field composing the full-state
𝐔ℎ ∈ 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 . When we update the magic points and consequently the submesh every 𝑛 time steps, we use the notation C-Un, for
example, C-U50 for an adaption of the magic points every 50 time steps.
    The methodology presented derives from heuristic considerations and the necessity to keep the computational costs as low as
possible. Experimentally it is shown that it is able to track the main moving features of our transient numerical simulations, thus
adapting the magic points’ position close to the most informative regions of the computational domain. See Fig. 4. Additional collo­
cation nodes are imposed on the boundaries to force the satisfaction of boundary conditions as can be noticed in Fig. 4, at the i­flow
left boundary.

4. Local nonlinear manifold

    Sometimes the 𝐿2 -norm relative reconstruction error (10a) cannot approximate with suﬃcient accuracy the nonlinear solution
manifold in terms of reconstruction error, or the autoencoder architecture 𝜙 ◦ 𝜓 ∶ ℝ𝑑 → ℝ𝑑 or 𝜙̃ ◦ 𝜓̃ ∶ ℝ𝑟rSVD → ℝ𝑟rSVD does not meet
the tolerance requirement (5). This happens when there are regions in the parameter space that correspond to less correlated solutions
in the solution manifold.
    A possible solution is to partition the parameter space in subdomains where the approximation properties of the rSVD modes and
the autoencoder are satisfactory for the problem at hand. There are many implementations of local ROMs, often under the name of
dictionary-based ROMs: the accuracy of the local linear approximations can be maximized in practice with ad hoc metrics based, for
example, on the Grassmann manifold [40]. Generally, they also can be eﬃciently applied to our framework, thanks to the deﬁnition
of our autoencoder through linear projections.
    The setting is introduced only for two communicating local solution manifolds. For 𝑖 = 1, 2, with the notations

        𝑛𝑖              ⊂ 𝑛train ,                                                                                                 (local parameter subset)
              train,𝑖
          𝑖          𝑟
        𝜙 ∶ ℝ → 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ ,                𝑑
                                                𝜙̃ 𝑖 ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑝 ,               𝑖
                                                                           𝜓 ∶ 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ → ℝ ,    𝑑     𝑟     𝑖
                                                                                                         𝜓̃ ∶ ℝ → ℝ ,𝑝     𝑟
                                                                                                                                           (local autoencoder)
          𝑖                         𝑑       𝑝           𝑖                  𝑝                  𝑑
        𝑓ﬁlter ∶ 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ → ℝ ,                        (𝑓ﬁlter )  −1
                                                                     ∶ ℝ → 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ ,                                                  (local linear projections)

        𝐴𝑖𝑛         ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train,𝑖 ,              𝑖
                                             𝐖 ∈ℝ ,         𝑑        𝑖
                                                                  𝑈 ∈ℝ         𝑑×𝑟rSVD
                                                                                         ,                                             (local rSVD quantities)
            train,𝑖

we denote the corresponding parametric subsets, the decoder maps, the encoder maps, the linear filter/transform maps, the training
snapshots matrices, the normalizing vectors and the local rSVD basis of the two local solution manifolds. In principle, the local latent
dimensions 𝑟 = 𝑟1 = 𝑟2 with our notation, can be diﬀerent 𝑟1 ≠ 𝑟2 and the same is valid for 𝑝 = 𝑟rSVD = 𝑝1 = 𝑝2 , that is 𝑝1 = 𝑟1rSVD ≠
𝑟2rSVD = 𝑝2 . In fact, it is possible to adapt the latent and linear filter dimensions of the nonlinear approximating manifold parametrized
by 𝜙𝑖 to the local Kolmogorov n-width decay of the subset of the parameter space under consideration. In a sense, the rationale is
similar to the one behind hp-FEM or hp-DG methods.
     Gluing two local solution manifolds requires care especially because it may not be guaranteed that the corresponding full­
states are close ((𝑓ﬁlter2 )−1 ◦ 𝑓 2           1 )−1 )(𝐔̃1 ) = (𝑓 1 )−1 (𝐔̃1 ) to each other with suﬃcient accuracy. Many techniques have
                                           ◦ (𝑓ﬁlter
                                     ﬁlter               ℎ       ﬁlter     ℎ
been developed to tackle this problem, but, for the moment, we will study only the most simple one: more eﬀective interface cou­
pling techniques should be implemented, in practice. In fact, a possible way to avoid this consists in just overlapping the training


                                                                                                    12
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                     Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 4. Visual example of adaptive gradient-based reduced over-collocation. Predicted velocity magnitude time snapshots, for 𝑡 ∈ {0.0 s, 0.4 s, 0.8 s, 1.2 s, 1.6 s, 2.0 s}, of
the 2d compressible Navier-Stokes equations’ model described in subsection 5.1.2 for a value of the Mach number Ma = 2.12422656, the fourth of five test parameters.
It can be seen that the 700 hyper-reduction collocation nodes in black (the mesh cells corresponding to the hyper-reduction collocation nodes are colored in black, the
mesh is reported in Fig. 6) and the corresponding submesh in grey, updated with gradient-based adaptive hyper-reduction through equation (20) every 50 time steps,
follow the transient dynamics. The time instants reported refer to the reference time interval 𝑡 ∈ [0.0 s, 2.5 s], the real time instants are obtained applying the scaling
reported in equation (24). (For interpretation of the colors in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)




datasets 𝐴𝑛train,1 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train,1 and 𝐴𝑛train,2 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train,2 , that is considering a bigger intersection of their corresponding parameters sub­
sets 𝑛1           ⊂ 𝑛train and 𝑛2          ⊂ 𝑛train , 𝑛1         ∩ 𝑛2         ≠ ∅. In this preliminary work, we do not perform parametric studies on
         train,1                    train,2                 train,1       train,2
the size of the intersection of the parametric subdomains.
   In our case, we have that the change of basis linear map 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                             12 = 𝑓 2        1 )−1 ∶ ℝ𝑟rSVD → ℝ𝑟rSVD is computed oﬄine as
                                                                         ◦ (𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                   ﬁlter
                                                                              (((           ) )        )
        𝐔̃ 2ℎ = 𝑓ﬁlter
                 12
                       (𝐔̃ 1ℎ ) = (𝑓ﬁlter
                                    2
                                          ◦ (𝑓ﬁlter
                                              1
                                                    )−1 )(𝐔̃ 1ℎ ) = (𝑈 2 )𝑇         𝐖1 ⊙ 𝑈 1 𝐔̃ 1ℎ ⊘ 𝐖2 .                                                                (22)
This change of basis between communicating local solution manifolds is represented schematically in Fig. 5.
   We will consider only two local solution manifolds such that only the time interval is partitioned, see section 5.1.2.

5. Numerical experiments

    We will test the presented methodology on two challenging benchmarks from the point of view of model order reduction, as they
evidently suﬀer from a slow Kolmogorov n-width decay. Employing classical linear projection-based ROMs would be unfeasible as
they would need more than hundreds of rSVD modes. For the comparison of classical methods with intrusive ones exploiting nonlinear
approximants see [7,12].
    The test cases we will present are developed with the open source CFD software library OpenFoam [41]. Being rather small test
cases, discretized with the finite volumes method on meshes with 4500, 32160 and 198633 cells, the speedups obtained are relatively
small. However, since our ROMs are independent on the number of dofs, as long as increasing the resolution does not bring to a slower
Kolmogorov n-width decay, more evident speedups can be achieved. Compared to the finite diﬀerences method employed in [7,12],
the FVM implementation in OpenFoam is highly optimized and it is therefore more challenging to achieve a speedup for small test
cases, but the computational cost of the forward evaluation of the decoder is similar. The new methodology is implemented on top
of the open-source software library for model order reduction ITHACA-FV [42].
    The first test case we consider involves the compressible Navier-Stokes equations (CNS) in the supersonic regime. We will consider
as parameters time and the Mach number Ma ∈ [2, 5] imposed at the i­flow boundary. In order to show, that the method scales well
increasing the number of dofs, we employ two meshes: a coarse one with 4500 cells and a finer one with 32160 cells, see Fig. 6. On
the first mesh in subsection 5.1.1, we test diﬀerent hyper-reduction methods. On the second mesh in subsection 5.1.2 we test the use
of local nonlinear manifold approximants and the straight-forward change of basis we have presented in section 4. The OpenFoam
solver we employ is the sonicFoam [11] solver.


                                                                                       13
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                       Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 5. Above: the decoder 𝜙1 of subdomain 1 on the left, and the encoder 𝜓 2 followed by the decoder 𝜙2 of subdomain 2. To pass from one subdomain whose solution
manifold is spanned by the rSVD modes associated to (𝑓 1 )−1
                                                          ﬁlter
                                                                to the one spanned by the rSVD modes associated to 𝑓ﬁlter
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                          and (𝑓 2 )−1
                                                                                                                                    ﬁlter
                                                                                                                                          , an eﬃcient change of basis needs to
be performed during the online stage. The dependency on the number of dofs is avoided by multiplying in the oﬄine stage the rSVD basis associated to subdomain 1 with
the ones associated to subdomain 2. Below: the same maps as above, only now an eﬃcient change of basis between subdomains 𝐔           ̃ 2 = 𝑓 12 (𝐔̃ 1 ) = (𝑓 2 ◦ (𝑓 1 )−1 )(𝐔̃ 1 )
                                                                                                                                        ℎ      ﬁlter ℎ       ﬁlter  ﬁlter       ℎ
can be used online, since it is precomputed oﬄine as a change of basis matrix of sizes 𝑝2 × 𝑝1 .


    The second test case we consider is the incompressible turbulent flow around the Ahmed body (INS). The parameters are time and
the slant angle of the Ahmed body. The test case presented is introduced and studied in [43]. There, steady state solutions are obtained
with the solver SIMPLE [44] (Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equations), however we employ PISO [45] (Pressure Implicit
with Splitting of Operator) since we want to reduce the transient dynamics that has a slow Kolmogorov n-width decay instead. Adding
time as a parameter brings to a much more complex solution manifold to approximate.
    The specifics of the convolutional autoencoders used are reported in the Appendix A along with the training costs and other hyper­
parameters. For all the CAE trainings we employed the ADAM [46] optimizer with initial learning rate of 0.001 and a scheduler that
halves it every 200 epochs if the validation loss has not improved. Every architecture is trained for 3000 epochs on a single GPU NVIDIA
Quadro RTX 4000. The wallclock time expended on training is between 1 hour and 1 hour and half for the test cases in 5.1.1, 5.1.2
and 5.2.1. Substantial computational savings depend on the choice of the architecture, especially on the fact that the training is
independent with respect to the number of dofs since the inputs and outputs of the autoencoder belong to the lower dimensional
space generated by the rSVD basis. In Tables 1, 2 and 3, are also reported the average time step computational cost over each time
step and test parameter, the average update of the magic point computational cost over each time step and test parameter, and the
average total computational cost over each test parameter considered.
    The metrics we have employed to assess the accuracy of our methodology are reported both in the training parameter range and
in the extrapolation range (shaded regions in red): the accuracy decays in the extrapolation regime. Extending the training parameter
range should solve this issue, unless the solution manifold has an intrinsic higher dimensionality and cannot be approximated with
suﬃcient accuracy anymore. Possible solutions include the employment of local approximants as discussed in section 4.
    In order not to interrupt the presentation of the numerical results, we postponed to Appendix B the showcase of some predicted
solutions of each test case: Fig. B.23 refers to the CNS1 test case in section 5.1.1, Fig. B.24 refers to the CNS2 test case in section 5.1.2
and finally Figs. B.25 and B.26 refers to the test case INS1 in section 5.2.1.


                                                                                    14
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                           Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
                              Table 1
                              CNS-1. Timings of the CNS on a coarse mesh, subsection 5.1.1. The timings of the reduced over-collocation
                              method C-UP50 relative to the choice of 𝑟ℎ = {150, 300, 600, 1200} collocation nodes is reported along the
                              full-order model (FOM) timings of the sonicFoam solver. The same reference time step as the FOM one is
                              employed (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001. Before the FOM results, the timings of C-UP50 but with a larger reference time
                              step of (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004 are reported in bold for a number of magic points 𝑟ℎ = 500. For the timings of the
                              CNS on the finer mesh, see Table 2.

                                    collocation nodes (𝑟ℎ )           average time-step      average update every 50           average total time

                                    𝑟ℎ = 150, (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001         11.937 [ms]            56.830 [ms]                       29.842 [s]
                                    𝑟ℎ = 300, (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001         25.294 [ms]            97.628 [ms]                       63.235 [s]
                                    𝑟ℎ = 600, (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001         36.894 [ms]            110.110 [ms]                      92.234 [s]
                                    𝑟ℎ = 1200, (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001        56.277 [ms]            119.707 [ms]                      140.691 [s]

                                    𝑟ℎ = 𝟓𝟎𝟎, (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004         28.736 [ms]            82.337 [ms]                       17.960 [s]

                                    FOM, (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001              13.440 [ms]            -                                 33.614 [s]

                                                                          FOM snapshots evaluation         rSVD      AE training

                                                   Total oﬄine cost       343 [s]                          62 [s]    61 [min]



                   Table 2
                   CNS-2. Timings of the CNS on a finer mesh, subsection 5.1.2. The timings of the reduced over-collocation method C-UP20
                   (first three columns) and C-UP50 (last three columns) relative to the choice of 𝑟ℎ = {150, 300, 600, 1200} collocation nodes is
                   reported along with the full-order model (FOM) timings of the sonicFoam solver. The reference time step of C-UP20 and C-UP50
                   is (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004, four times bigger than the FOM. The diﬀerent reference time steps aﬀect the average total time and not the
                   mean time steps computational costs. For the timings of the CNS on the coarse mesh, see Table 1. The change of basis between
                   the local nonlinear manifolds is included in the average total time. The label ‘av’ stands for average and ‘up’ stands for update.

                                 av time-step           av up every 20      av total time            av time-step      av up every 50          av total time

                       150       38.615 [ms]            286.103 [ms]        34.215 [s]               35.297 [ms]       302.612 [ms]            25.890 [s]
                       300       52.209 [ms]            325.225 [ms]        42.774 [s]               48.940 [ms]       316.992 [ms]            34.717 [s]
                       600       62.888 [ms]            330.269 [ms]        49.642 [s]               61.803 [ms]       358.956 [ms]            42.887 [s]
                       1200      74.759 [ms]            362.719 [ms]        58.302 [s]               75.128 [ms]       362.236 [ms]            51.510 [s]

                       FOM       110.334 [ms]           -                   275.944 [s]              110.334 [ms]      -                       275.944 [s]

                                                                         FOM snapshots evaluation          rSVD      AE training

                                                   Total oﬄine cost      1.57 [h]                          269 [s]   1.34 [h]



                 Table 3
                 INS-1. Timings of the INS for small geometrical deformations, subsection 5.2.1. The timings of the reduced over-collocation methods
                 C-UP20 and C-UP50 relative to the choice of 𝑟ℎ = {500, 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500} collocation nodes is reported along the full-order
                 model (FOM) timings of the PISO solver. The time step of C-UP20 and C-UP50 is (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.0005, five times bigger than the FOM-1
                 with (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.0001 on 1 CPU core. The diﬀerent reference time steps aﬀect the average total time and not the mean time steps
                 computational costs. The timings for the FOM-8 run in parallel with 8 CPU cores are wallclock times. The label ‘av’ stands for
                 average and ‘up’ for update.

                     MP             av time-step        av up every 20      av total time            av time-step          av up every 50       av total time

                     500            66.650 [ms]         660.136 [ms]        19.931 [s]               49.171 [ms]           572.604 [ms]         12.125 [s]
                     1000           116.432 [ms]        749.300 [ms]        30.779 [s]               136.320 [ms]          778.478 [ms]         30.378 [s]
                     1500           171.507 [ms]        809.385 [ms]        42.395 [s]               160.974 [ms]          842.653 [ms]         35.565 [s]
                     2000           212.034 [ms]        777.112 [ms]        50.178 [s]               194.183 [ms]          723.026 [ms]         41.729 [s]
                     2500           276.482 [ms]        933.621 [ms]        64.633 [s]               312.016 [ms]          973.697 [ms]         66.298 [s]

                     FOM-1          791.318 [ms]        -                   13.189 [min]             791.318 [ms]          -                    13.189 [min]
                     FOM-8          365.355 [ms]        -                   3.589 [min]              365.355 [ms]          -                    3.589 [min]

                                                     FOM-1 snapshots evaluation           FOM-8 snapshots evaluation           rSVD          AE training

                            Total oﬄine cost         1.09 [h]                             23 [min]                             15 [min]      1.45 [h]



5.1. Supersonic flow past a NACA airfoil

    The first nonlinear time-dependent parametric PDE model we consider
                                                                     √ are the compressible Navier-Stokes equations for a perfect
                                                                                                       𝑅
diatomic gas with ratio of specific heat 𝛾 = 7∕5. A speed of sound of 𝑐 = 𝛾 𝑇 = 1 m/s is imposed through the choice of molar mass
                                                                            𝑀
𝑀 at a temperature of 𝑇 = 1𝐾 , where 𝑅 is the universal gas constant. The following system of PDEs is solved on the 2d computational
domain Ωℎ ⊂ ℝ shown in Fig. 6:
               2




                                                                                    15
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                             Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 6. Left: computational domain of the compressible flow past a NACA airfoil test case. Center: coarse mesh with 4500 cells. Right: finer mesh with 32160 cells.



                                                                  𝜕𝑡 𝜌 + ∇ ⋅ (𝜌𝐮) = 0,                                (mass conservation)                   (23a)
                                                   ( (                        ))
                                                             𝑇
                  𝜕𝑡 (𝜌𝐮) + ∇ ⋅ (𝜌𝐮 ⊗ 𝐮) + ∇𝑝 − ∇ ⋅ 𝜈 ∇𝐮 + ∇𝐮 + 13 (∇ ⋅ 𝐮)𝐼𝑑      = 0,                        (momentum conservation)                       (23b)
                                                 ( (                        ) )
        𝜕𝑡 𝜌(𝑒 + 𝐾) + ∇ ⋅ ((𝜌(𝑒 + 𝐾) + 𝑝)𝐮) − ∇ ⋅ 𝜈 ∇𝐮 + ∇𝐮𝑇 + 13 (∇ ⋅ 𝐮)𝐼𝑑 𝐮 = 0,                                  (energy conservation)                   (23c)

                                                            𝑒 = 𝑇 𝑐𝑣 ,     𝑝𝑐𝑣 = 𝜌𝑅𝑒,   𝐾 = 12 𝜌𝐮2 ,                     (state equations),                 (23d)
the parameters we consider are time and the inlet Mach number Ma = |𝐮|∕𝑐 = |𝐮|, 𝜇 = Ma ∈ [2, 5], 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉𝜇 = {1, … , 𝑁𝜇 }. The viscosity
is fixed at 𝜈 = 1𝑒 − 5. The boundary conditions are imposed at the i­flow Γinflow , ou­flow Γoutflow and airfoil Γairfoil boundaries, see
Fig. 6. The initial and boundary conditions for the velocity 𝐮, pressure 𝑝 and temperature 𝑇 fields are:

                        ⎧𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = Ma,        (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ (Ω̊ ℎ × {𝑡 = 0}) ∪ (Γinflow × [0, 𝑇𝝁 ])
                        ⎪
                        ⎨𝑝(𝐱, 𝑡) = 1,         (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ (Ω̊ ℎ × {𝑡 = 0}) ∪ (Γinflow × [0, 𝑇𝝁 ]) ,
                        ⎪𝑇 (𝐱, 𝑡) = 1,        (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ (Ω̊ ℎ × {𝑡 = 0}) ∪ (Γinflow × [0, 𝑇𝝁 ])
                        ⎩
        ⎧𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,          𝐱 ∈ Γoutflow          ⎧𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,            𝐱 ∈ Γairfoil
        ⎪                                                 ⎪
        ⎨(non-reflective),          𝐱 ∈ Γoutflow ,        ⎨𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑝(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,       𝐱 ∈ Γairfoil ,
        ⎪𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑇 (𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,         𝐱 ∈ Γoutflow          ⎪𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑇 (𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,      𝐱 ∈ Γairfoil
        ⎩                                                 ⎩
where non-reflective boundary conditions are imposed on the pressure field at the ou­flow boundaries.
    The Mach number training and test instances are sampled from the parameter space  = [2, 5] × 𝑇𝜇 , such that the Mach angle 𝛼
is sampled uniformly, and the time step Δ𝑡𝜇 and final time 𝑡𝑁𝜇 are chosen depending on the Mach number from the reference time
step (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001 and final time (𝑡𝑁 )ref = 2.5:
                      1                       Maref                        Maref
        𝛼 = arcsin        ,   Δ𝑡𝜇 = (Δ𝑡)ref           ,   𝑡𝑁𝜇 = (𝑡𝑁 )ref                                                                                      (24)
                     Ma                        Ma                           Ma
in this way the training and test time series have the same length even if the final times are diﬀerent.
    We take into account two diﬀerent meshes a coarse one with 4500 cells and 2700 dofs and a finer one with 32160 cells and
192960 dofs. We will refer to these two test cases with the notation CNS-1 for the coarse mesh and CNS-2 for the finer mesh. The
employment of two meshes permits us to show that our methodologies achieve more signiﬁcant speedups when the number of dofs
is increased since they are independent on the number of dofs: the timings and relative speedups can be observed from Tables 1
and 2.
    The solver we will employ is OpenFoam’s [41] pressure-based transonic/supersonic solver for compressible gases sonicFoam [11].
SonicFoam Algorithm 2 (Fig. 7) solves for the solution at the 𝑛-th time instant following PIMPLE predictor-corrector scheme, a com­
bination of PISO [45] and SIMPLE [44]. A more detailed introduction to the notation introduced hereafter can be found in [47]. In
Algorithm 2, we highlight the predictor-corrector scheme and the main steps. We employ the Euler scheme in time. Starting from the
previous fields 𝐮𝑛 velocity, 𝜌𝑛 density, 𝑒𝑛 internal energy, and 𝑝𝑛 pressure, the solutions at time step 𝑛 + 1 are evaluated. After an inter­
mediate density evaluation 𝜌∗ in line 2 corresponding to the continuity equation (23a), begins the PIMPLE corrector loop from line 3:
this outer loop comes from SIMPLE and relaxes the intermediate solution fields after every iteration. Then, at line 4, the intermediate
velocity field 𝐮∗ is evaluated implicitly solving the momentum equation (23b): the diagonal 𝐴[𝜌∗ ] and over-diagonal 𝐻[𝐮∗ , 𝜌∗ ] parts
of the system are highlighted along with the pressure contribution ∇𝑝∗ since they will be employed later in the pressure-Poisson
equation at line 10. The energy predictor step at line 5 is evaluated afterwards corresponding to the energy conservation (23c). Then,
the thermodynamics properties corresponding to the state equations (23d) are corrected and the PISO pressure corrector loop begins
at line 7. Inside the non-orthogonal corrector loop in case of non-orthogonal meshes, the pressure-Poisson equation is repeatedly
solved and, afterwards, the velocity is corrected to satisfy the continuity equation and the density is updated with the new pressure
through the equations of state. Many steps have not been reported for simplicity, for a more detailed analysis see [11]. What we
want to show is that in comparison, the nonlinear least-squares Petrov-Galerkin scheme for the compressible Navier-Stokes (CNS)
equations (NM-LSPG-CNS) is simpl­fied, at each 𝑛-th time step and 𝑖-th intermediate optimization step in Algorithm 3: having a


                                                                              16
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                             Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 7. INS. Comparison between the 𝑛-th time instant iterations of the full-order model numerical scheme sonicFoam (Left) and the nonlinear manifold least-squares
Petrov Galerkin (NM-LSPG-CNS) method (Right).




solution manifold, trained on a previous database, as ansatz space, the corrector loops can be avoided and only the residual eval­
uation of the mass (23a), momentum (23b), energy (23c) and pressure-Poisson equations are needed. For the same reasoning the
orthogonal corrector loops can be avoided as the solutions searched for on the approximant nonlinear manifold should be already
corrected.
   Along the lines of the previous considerations, we can employ larger time steps. In fact, it will be shown that using four times
the reference time step, that is (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004, brings a speedup also in the case of a coarse mesh, see Table 1. To get a grasp of the
extension of the solution manifold for the test cases CNS-1 and CNS-2, we show 4 snapshots corresponding to the time instants and
Mach numbers 𝑡 = 0.2 s, Ma = 5.2, 𝑡 = 2.5 s, Ma = 5.2, 𝑡 = 0.2 s, Ma = 1.8, and 𝑡 = 2.5 s, Ma = 1.8 in Fig. 8.
   The value of the 𝐿2 relative error is low for the internal energy field because its average absolute value is high as can be seen in
Appendix B for the test cases CNS1 and CNS2.


                                                                             17
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                 Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 8. CNS-1 and CNS-2. From left to right: test full-order snapshots representing the velocity field magnitude corresponding to the parametric values (𝑡 = 0.2 s, Ma =
5.2), (𝑡 = 2.5 s, Ma = 5.2), (𝑡 = 0.2 s, Ma = 1.8), and (𝑡 = 2.5 s, Ma = 1.8). The whole extension of the solution manifold includes the transient dynamics from the time
instants 𝑡 = 0 s to 𝑡 = 2.5 s opportunely rescaled through equation (24) and the diﬀerent test Mach number values Ma ∈ [1.8, 5.2]. The presence of moving discontinuities
at diﬀerent Mach angles makes this test case diﬃcult to reduced with classical linear projection based ROMs.




Fig. 9. CNS-1. Comparison of hyper-reduction methods based on the mean 𝐿2 relative error evaluated on each physical field of interest for the CNS test case. The
acronyms correspond to: AE-REC is the autoencoder reconstruction error from (5), C-UP50 is the reduced collocation method with the gradient based-sampling
strategy from subsection 3.2 applied every 50 time steps over 2000 time instants; the other notations are introduced in subsections 3.1.1, 3.1.2, and 3.1.3. For all the
methods, it is employed a fixed number of 𝑟ℎ = 𝟓𝟎𝟎 collocation nodes and 𝑟rSVD = 𝟏𝟓𝟎 rSVD modes used for both the deﬁnition of the nonlinear approximant map
introduced in section 2.2 and the hyper-reduction basis. With the current monolithic hyper-reduction implementation, the best methods are the collocated ones.


5.1.1. Interpolation and quadrature based hyper-reduction on a coarse mesh (CNS-1)
   As anticipated, in this subsection we will consider a coarse mesh of 4500 cells, reported in Fig. 6, for a total of 𝑑 = 27000 dofs.
The training interval is Ma ∈ [2, 5] and 𝑡 ∈ {0, Δ𝑡, … , 2500 ⋅ Δ𝑡} = 𝑇𝝁 with Maref = 2 and (𝑇𝜇 )ref = 2, and the time steps opportunely
scaled with respect to the current Mach number through equation (24). We consider the following training and test Mach numbers

        train = {5, 4.256, 3.709, 3.291, 2.960, 2.693, 2.473, 2.290, 2.134, 2} × 𝑇𝝁 ,               |train | = 10 ⋅ 2500,                                       (25a)

         test = {𝟓.𝟐, 4.042, 3.314, 2.816, 2.455, 2.182, 𝟏.𝟗𝟕𝟎, 𝟏.𝟖} × 𝑇𝝁 ,             |test | = 8 ⋅ 2500,                                                    (25b)
it can be observed that the first and last two test parameters are in the extrapolation regime as they don’t belong to the interval [2, 5].
From now on, the test parameters will be numbered with the order in which they appear in equation (25b) and refer only to the
Mach number: from test parameter 1 with Ma = 5.2 to test parameter 8 with Ma = 1.8, we will use this notation also in the following
ﬁgures. A grasp of the solution manifold extension can be observed in Fig. 8. So, the training dataset 𝐴train ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train is represented
by 𝑛train = |train | ⋅ 1250 = 12500 training snapshots, as only one every two time instants is saved. The test dataset 𝐴test ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛test is
composed by 𝑛test = |test | ⋅ 500 = 5000 snapshots as only one every four time instants is saved. The number of rSVD modes considered
is 𝑟rSVD = 150 evaluated from the training dataset 𝐴train . The CAE architecture employed is reported in Table A.4.
    As a first study, we show in Fig. 9 the accuracy of the diﬀerent hyper-reduction methods introduced in section 3. A fixed number
of 𝑟ℎ = 𝟓𝟎𝟎 collocation nodes and 𝑟rSVD = 𝟏𝟓𝟎 rSVD modes used for both the deﬁnition of the nonlinear approximant map introduced
in section 2.2 and the hyper-reduction basis are employed for all the methods. When residual basis RB is employed they are evaluated
separately with respect to the ones used to d­fine the nonlinear approximant 𝜙 ∶ ℝ𝑟 → ℝ𝑑 . It can be seen that the reconstruction
error (5) of the autoencoder represents the baseline accuracy that we want to reach in terms of mean 𝐿2 relative error. It is also clear
that with our implementation of hyper-reduction the most accurate methods are the collocated ones. The lower accuracy of the other
methodologies may be attributed to our choice of considering the physical fields of interest altogether in a monolithic fashion, both
for the evaluation of the rSVD basis employed in the hyper-reduction oﬄine stage and the computation of the normalization vectors
from equation (7). Moreover, collocation methods are more eﬃcient as the collocated residuals do not need to be multiplied further
by a pseudo-inverse or a vector of weights as in DEIM and ECSW methods. Further comments are added in section 6.


                                                                                18
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                          Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 10. CNS-1. The decay of the mean 𝐿2 relative error is assessed for the C-DEIM, C-DEIM-SOPT, and C-UP50 reduced over-collocation methods with sampling
strategies corresponding to a greedy one, the quasi-optimal (SOPT) one and the gradient-based adaptive one every 50 time steps. In this case we employ the same
reference time step as the full-order model (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001. The baseline represented by the autoencoder mean 𝐿2 reconstruction error AE-REC is reported. The
extrapolation parameters have a shaded red background.


    Since we observed that collocated hyper-reduction reached a better accuracy, we show in the next study the decay of the mean 𝐿2
relative error associated to the C-DEIM, C-DEIM-SOPT, and C-UP50 methods, varying the number of collocation nodes/magic points
from 150 to 1200. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The most eﬃcient method is C-UP50, the gradient-based adaptive one, that pays
the additional cost of a submesh update every 50 time steps.
    The advantage of having a continuous nonlinear approximant for the solution manifold, enables the possibility to choose a bigger
reference time step in the online prediction stage. The results in terms of mean and max 𝐿2 relative error are shown in Fig. 11. Thanks
to this choice of reference time step (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004 four times bigger than the full-order one (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001 and twice as the sampling
step used to select the training snapshots 𝐴train ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train , a speedup can be achieved also for this small test case.
    The average computational times of the NM-LSPG method with gradient-based adaptive hyper-reduction C-UP50 are shown in
Table 1. The average is performed considering all 8 test parameters for diﬀerent Mach numbers. The average total time includes the
cost of submesh updates introduced by the C-UP50 hyper-reduction. There is no evident speedup with respect to the full-order model.
However, when a four time bigger reference time step (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004 is imposed a speedup of almost 2 is achieved also for this small
test case.

5.1.2. Collocated hyper-reduction on a finer mesh (CNS-2)
   To be sure to obtain a good approximation with rSVD modes, we increase the number of training snapshots for this CNS-2 test
case on the finer mesh of 32160 cells shown in Fig. 6. So we consider the following 20 training and 5 test parameters:

        train = {5., 4.617, 4.290, 4.007, 3.760, 3.543, 3.350, 3.178, 3.024, 2.885,
                   2.758, 2.644, 2.539, 2.442, 2.354, 2.272, 2.196, 2.126, 2.061, 2.} × 𝑇𝝁 ,        |train | = 20 ⋅ 2500,                              (26a)

         test = {5.2, 3.469, 2.622, 2.124, 1.8} × 𝑇𝝁 ,       |test | = 5 ⋅ 2500,                                                                      (26b)
the first and last test parameters in bold correspond to the extrapolation regime. We remark that we did not optimize the number of
training snapshots: possibly, a smaller number of them is needed to obtain an accurate regression of the solution manifold. As for the
previous test case we will refer to the test Mach numbers from Ma = 5.2 to Ma = 1.8 with the numbers from 1 to 5 in this order. A


                                                                           19
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 11. CNS-1. Accuracy of the nonlinear manifold least-squares Petrov-Galerkin (NM-LSPG) method with adaptive gradient-based reduced over-collocation (C­
UP50) every 50 time steps. The results are reported in terms of the mean 𝐿2 relative error for the physical fields of interest with respect to the 8 test parameters.
The extrapolation regimes are delimited by a red shaded background. The number of magic points is ℎ𝑟 = 500. It is important to notice that the reference time step
is (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004 and not (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001 equal to the full-order model one. This permits the methodology to reach a speedup even for this small test cases with only
4500 cells.




Fig. 12. CNS-2. The decay of the mean and max 𝐿2 reconstruction errors d­fined through equations (10a) for the 20 train parameters introduced in equation (26a), is
shown. The number of rSVD modes initially chosen on the whole parameter space for this test case is 𝑟rSVD = 𝟑𝟎𝟎. Even though the solution manifold includes moving
discontinuities at diﬀerent Mach angles as shown in Fig. 8, a moderately high number of rSVD modes can still be employed to obtain a good reconstruction error
but at the same time precludes the implementation of eﬃcient linear projection-based ROMs. A heuristic understanding of the moderately slow Kolmogorov n-width
decay for this test case can be observed in the degradation of the reconstruction error on the test set in Fig. 13.



grasp of the extension of the solution manifold we want to approximate is shown in Fig. 8. The training dataset 𝐴train ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛train is
represented by 𝑛train = |train | ⋅ 625 = 20 ⋅ 625 = 12500 training snapshots, since only one every four time instants is saved. The test
dataset 𝐴test ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑛test is composed by 𝑛test = |test | ⋅ 625 = 5 ⋅ 625 = 3125 snapshots as only one every four time instants is saved. At
ﬁrst, the number of rSVD modes considered on the whole parameter space is 𝑟rSVD = 300 evaluated from the training dataset 𝐴train .
Later, we will extract rSVD on two separate time intervals to study the performance of local nonlinear solution manifolds. The decay
of the mean and max 𝐿2 reconstruction errors is shown for the fields of interest in Figs. 12 and 13 for the training and test datasets.
The rSVD basis evaluated from the training dataset as explained in section 2.3 are the same used to evaluate the test reconstruction
error in Fig. 13. The presence of moving discontinuities coming from the transient dynamics and the diﬀerent Mach angles causes an
evident degradation of the test reconstruction error with respect to the training reconstruction error.


                                                                              20
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                             Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 13. CNS-2. The decay of the mean and max 𝐿2 reconstruction errors d­fined through equations (10a) for the 5 test parameters introduced in equation (10b), is
shown. The number of rSVD modes initially chosen on the whole parameter space for this test case is 𝑟rSVD = 300. The presence of moving discontinuities at diﬀerent
Mach angles as shown in Fig. 8 causes an evident degradation of the reconstruction error with respect to the training reconstruction error in Fig. 12. A shaded red
background ident­fies the extrapolation regime.



    For this test case, a moderately high number of rSVD modes equal to 𝑟rSVD = 300 can be employed to approximate with suﬃ­
cient accuracy the solution manifold. However, it can be observed that more complex parameter dependencies can exacerbate this
behavior and make the approximation of the solution manifold with a linear rSVD basis unfeasible. In those cases, fully nonlinear NN
architectures directly supported on the dofs of the physical fields of interest can be employed and hyper-reduced with the variant of
the nonlinear manifold LSPG method introduced in [9].
    We want to study the implementation of local nonlinear manifolds approximants and how to eﬃciently change from one
subdomain to the other in the online stage. We consider only two parametric subdomains determined by the splitting of the
reference time interval [0 s, 2.5 s] into two subintervals [0 s, 1.2 s] ⊃ 𝑇𝝁1 and [0.6 s, 2.5 s] ⊃ 𝑇𝝁2 , with |𝑇𝝁1 | = 1.2∕(Δ𝑡)ref = 300 and
|𝑇𝝁2 | = (2.5 − 0.6)∕(Δ𝑡)ref = 625 − 150 since one every 4 time instants in [0, 2.5] is saved with a reference time step of (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001.
Notice that they overlap in order to achieve a good accuracy when the change of basis is performed. The change of basis between the
domains is performed at the reference time instant 𝑡 = 𝟎.𝟖𝐬. More sophisticated techniques can be implemented [48]. The notation
we employ to distinguish between the subdomains is introduced in section 4. So the parameter spaces we consider are:

        𝑛1          = {5., 4.617, 4.290, 4.007, 3.760, 3.543, 3.350, 3.178, 3.024, 2.885,
           train,1

                        2.758, 2.644, 2.539, 2.442, 2.354, 2.272, 2.196, 2.126, 2.061, 2.} × 𝑇𝝁1 ,       |𝑛1          | = 20 ⋅ 300,
                                                                                                             train,1

        𝑛2        = {5., 4.617, 4.290, 4.007, 3.760, 3.543, 3.350, 3.178, 3.024, 2.885,
           train,2

                        2.758, 2.644, 2.539, 2.442, 2.354, 2.272, 2.196, 2.126, 2.061, 2.} × 𝑇𝝁2 ,       |𝑛2          | = 20 ⋅ (625 − 150),
                                                                                                             train,2

                                                                             𝑑×𝑛train,𝑖
and consequently the training snapshots matrices 𝐴𝑖𝑛                      ∈ℝ         𝑖 = 1, 2 are assembled and the two rSVD basis 𝑈 𝑖 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑟rSVD
                                                                  train,𝑖
𝑖 = 1, 2 evaluated. Each one has 𝑟rSVD = 300 modes, but in principle a diﬀerent number can be used. The number of training snapshots
are 𝑛train,1 = 20 ⋅ |𝑇𝝁1 | = 20 ⋅ 300 and 𝑛train,2 = 20 ⋅ |𝑇𝝁2 | = 20 ⋅ (625 − 150). The same CAE architecture for the two nonlinear approximants
𝜙𝑖 ∶ ℝ𝑟 → 𝑋ℎ ∼ ℝ𝑑 𝑖 = 1, 2 is employed and reported in Table A.5. The latent dimension is 4 in both cases. We remind that the change
of basis matrix from equation (22) is computed oﬄine so the methodology maintains the independence with respect to the number
of dofs.
    The results for the choice of 𝑟ℎ = 800 collocation nodes, (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001 reference time step and 𝐶 − 𝑈 𝑃 50 hyper-reduction method,
are reported in Fig. 14. There, the whole trajectories corresponding to the orderly numbered 5 test parameters are shown. In particular,
the extrapolation regimes involving parameters 1 and 5 are shown, and the instant 𝑡 = 0.8 s in reference time scale, is highlighted for
each test trajectory by an orange vertical line. It must be observed that not always the employment of local nonlinear submanifolds
permits to reach smaller prediction errors: the only test parameter aﬀected by an improvement is test parameter 4, that nonetheless
corresponds to Mach number Ma = 2.124, and therefore it is more diﬃcult to approximate since the Mach angle is wider. For this


                                                                             21
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 14. CNS-2. Results corresponding to the employment of two local nonlinear manifolds corresponding to the reference time intervals [0 s, 1.2 s] = 𝑇𝝁1 and
[0.6 s, 2.5 s] = 𝑇𝝁2 , as introduced in section 4. The mean 𝐿2 relative error and relative errors in max norm are shown for each of the 625 time instances associ­
ated with each one of the 5 test parameters corresponding to the test Mach numbers in equation (26b):each one of the five columns corresponds to a diﬀerent test
parameters. The reference time instant in which the change of basis is performed is 𝑡 = 0.8 s and it is highlighted by an orange vertical line for each of the 5 test
parameter. The extrapolation parameters 1 and 5 have a shaded red background.


test case, we don’t notice discontinuities from the passage of the solution from one local solution manifold to the other, as it can be
seen also from the continuity of the errors in Fig. 14.
    Similarly to the previous test case CNS-1, the decay of the mean 𝐿2 relative error is studied in Fig. 15 for the C-UP20 and C-UP50
hyper-reduction methods with reference time step (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004, that is four times the reference time step of the FOM (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001.
In this case always two local subdomains are considered. Associated with these studies, the computational costs for mean time instant
evaluation and mean total time expended for the whole trajectory evaluation with reference time step (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004, are shown in
Table 2. It can be observed that the computational costs increase from the same number of collocation nodes (MP) in Table 2 with
respect to Table 1: this is due mostly to the number of rSVD basis changed from 150 to 300.

5.2. Incompressible turbulent flow around the Ahmed body

   The other benchmark (INS) we introduce to test our methodology involves the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS)
used to model an incompressible flow around the Ahmed body:
                                          (         (          ))
        𝜕𝑡 𝐮̄ + ∇ ⋅ (̄𝐮 ⊗ 𝐮̄ ) + ∇𝑝̄ − ∇ ⋅ (𝜈 + 𝜈𝑡 ) ∇̄𝐮 + ∇̄𝐮𝑇 = 0,                   (momentum conservation)                                                (28a)

                                                                ∇ ⋅ 𝐮̄ = 0,                    (mass conservation)                                            (28b)
where 𝐮̄ and 𝑝̄ are the time averaged velocity and the kinematic pressure fields, and 𝜈𝑡 is the kinematic Eddy turbulent viscosity.
The turbulence is modeled with the Spalart-Allmaras one-equation model [49,50]. The Reynolds number is in the order of Re =
2.8 ⋅ 106 . The parameters we consider are the slant angle 𝜃 of the Ahmed body and time  = [𝜃min , 𝜃max ] × 𝑇𝝁 . We will consider two
parameter ranges for the slant angle: one associated to small geometrical deformations in subsection 5.2.1 (INS-1) with 𝜃min = 15◦ and
𝜃max = 18.265◦ and one associated to large geometrical deformations in subsection 5.2.2 (INS-2) with 𝜃min = 15◦ and 𝜃max = 35◦ . The
computational domain is shown in Fig. 16. The geometry of the Ahmed body and the mesh are deformed with radial basis function
interpolation as described in [43].
    The mesh, geometries, initial and boundary conditions are taken from the studies performed in [43] where a classical linear
projection-based reduced order method is applied to reduce the computational cost of the FOM solved with the SIMPLE [44] numerical
scheme with the employment of a neural network to approximate the Eddy viscosity. In that case, steady-state solutions are predicted


                                                                              22
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 15. CNS-2. The decay of the mean 𝐿2 relative error is assessed for the C-UP20, and C-UP50 reduced over-collocation methods with sampling strategies corre­
sponding to the gradient-based adaptive one every 50 and 20 time steps, respectively. In this case we employ a reference time step of four times (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.004 s the
full-order model one (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.001 s. We always consider two local nonlinear manifolds. The baseline represented by the autoencoder mean 𝐿2 reconstruction error
AE-REC is reported. The extrapolation parameters 1 and 5 have a shaded red background.




Fig. 16. INS. Left: computational domain of the incompressible turbulent flow past the Ahmed body test case. The mesh has 198633 cells, for a total of 𝑑 = 993165
dofs for each geometrical deformation corresponding to a diﬀerent choice of the slant angle 𝜃 . Right: description of the boundaries of the computational domain: a
ﬁxed velocity 40 ms−1 and pressure 𝑝 = 0 fields are imposed at the i­flow boundary Γinflow for each geometrical deformation.


while we focus, with the PISO [45] numerical scheme, on the transient dynamics since it is more challenging from the point of view
of solution manifold approximation.
    The time interval is not dependent on the slant angle 𝜃 , that is the final time is 𝑇𝝁 = 𝑇 = 0.1 s, the time step is (Δ𝑡)𝝁 = Δ𝑡 = 0.0001 s
and the collection of time instants is 𝑇𝝁 = 𝑉 = {0 s, 0.0001 s, … , 0.1 s}. The initial and boundary conditions for the velocity 𝐮̄ and
pressure 𝑝̄ averaged fields are:
        {                                                           {
          𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = 40 ms−1 ,         (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ Ω̊ ℎ × {𝑡 = 0}           𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = 40 ms−1 ,   𝐱 ∈ Γinflow
                                                              ,                                           ,
         𝑝(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,                           ̊
                                      (𝐱, 𝑡) ∈ Ωℎ × {𝑡 = 0}             𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑝(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,     𝐱 ∈ Γinflow
        {                                                {
         𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,          𝐱 ∈ Γoutflow           𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,           𝐱 ∈ ΓAhmed ∪ Γbottom
                                                   ,                                                   ,
         𝑝(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,               𝐱 ∈ Γoutflow           𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑝(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,      𝐱 ∈ ΓAhmed ∪ Γbottom
        {
          𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝐮(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,         𝐱 ∈ Γsides
         𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑝(𝐱, 𝑡) = 0,          𝐱 ∈ Γsides
where the computational domain and its boundaries Γoutflow , Γinflow , ΓAhmed , Γbottom and the remaining faces Γsides are shown in
Fig. 16. The computational mesh considered has a fixed number of cells for each geometrical deformation equal to 𝑀 = 𝟏𝟗𝟖𝟔𝟑𝟑 for
a total of 𝑑 = 𝟗𝟗𝟑𝟏𝟔𝟓 dofs considering the average velocity, pressure and Eddy viscosity fields.
    The OpenFoam solver we employ is the transient PISO numerical scheme. The predictor-corrector scheme is similar to the one
described for the sonicFoam solver in subsection 5.1 and shown in Algorithm 4 (Fig. 17) in a simpl­fied version for a comparison
with the nonlinear manifold least-squares Petrov-Galerkin (NM-INS) method in Algorithm 5. As before, we consider only the 𝑛-th


                                                                              23
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                          Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 17. INS. Comparison between the 𝑛-th time instant iterations of the full-order model numerical scheme PISO (Left) and the nonlinear manifold least-squares
Petrov Galerkin (NM-INS)method (Right).


time instant and possible 𝑖-th intermediate optimization steps for the NM-INS method. First, the velocity field is obtained with an
implicit predictor step in line 2, where the time discretization is hidden inside the diagonal 𝐴 and over-diagonal 𝐻[𝐮∗ , 𝜈𝑡𝑛 ] parts of
the finite volume discretization of the Reynolds averaged momentum equation (28a). Afterwards, the velocity is corrected to satisfy
the continuity equation (28b) through the kinematic pressure, obtained with a pressure-Poisson equation in line 5. Finally, the new
Eddy viscosity is obtained.
    The NM-INS method does not implement a predictor-correct strategy instead: only residual evaluations need to be computed and
PISO and non-orthogonal corrector loops are omitted, as we search for the converged solutions corresponding to the last corrector
steps. We remark that we don’t consider the residual of the Eddy viscosity equation of the Spalart-Allmaras one-equation model in the
NM-INS algorithm, but only the velocity and pressure ones. This choice and the diﬃculty of linearly approximating the Eddy viscosity
in our testcase, compared to the velocity and pressure fields, could be the reasons behind the worse accuracy in the predictions of
the Eddy viscosity. For example, this can be observed in Fig. 19.
    As for the CNS test case, we consider a five times bigger time step for the nonlinear manifold method: instead of Δ𝑡 = 0.0001 s
employed for the full-order solutions, we set Δ𝑡 = 0.0005 for the NM-INS method.

5.2.1. Small geometrical deformations (INS-1)
   As can be understood from the small geometrical deformations in Fig. 18, the diﬃculty resides in the approximation of the transient
dynamics rather than in the i­fluence of the geometrical parameter. We consider 5 training slant angles and 4 test slant angles inside
the training range (no extrapolation):
                           (               )
        train = {15◦ + 𝑖 ⋅ (35◦ − 15◦ )∕49 |𝑖 ∈ {0, 2, 4, 6, 8}} × 𝑉 , |train | = 5,                                                                  (29a)
                           (               )
         test = {15◦ + 𝑖 ⋅ (35◦ − 15◦ )∕49 |𝑖 ∈ {1, 3, 5, 7}} × 𝑉 , |test | = 4, .                                                                    (29b)
In the order written in equations (29a) and (29b), we name the training and test parameters from 1 to 5 and from 1 to 4, respectively.
    As anticipated we employ a five times bigger time step Δ𝑡 = 0.0005 s with respect to the full-order one Δ𝑡 = 0.0001 s. We apply
the C-UP-20 hyper-reduction with 𝑟ℎ = 1500 collocation nodes. For the test parameter 1, 𝜃 = 15.4◦ , the mean 𝐿2 relative errors
corresponding to the 1000 time instants from 0.0005 s to 0.1 s are shown in Fig. 19. As can be seen, eﬃcient and relatively accurate
predictions can be obtained. The computational time spent is summarized in Table 3, reaching a speedup of around 26 with respect


                                                                           24
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                                  Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 18. INS-1. Left: Ahmed body with slant angle 𝜃 = 15.408◦ from the training parameter set. Right: Ahmed body with slant angle 𝜃 = 18.265◦ from the training
parameter set.




Fig. 19. INS-1. Every 10 time steps, the 𝐿2 relative error is reported for the predicted physical fields of interest associated to test parameter 1, corresponding to the
slant angle 𝜃 = 15.408◦ and the C-UP20 method with 𝐫𝐡 = 𝟏𝟓𝟎𝟎 collocation nodes. The training parameter range is relatively small [15◦ , 18.265◦ ]. The 𝐿2 autoencoder
relative reconstruction error represents an experimental lower bound to the prediction error. The accuracy is worse in the first time steps, a possible strategy to further
reduce it is to employ local nonlinear manifold approximations as described in section 4.




to the full-order model for this simple test case. Local nonlinear manifold approximations could be employed to achieve better
predictions in the initial time instants, splitting the time interval.
    The convergence with respect to the number of collocation nodes is shown in Fig. 20 for the hyper-reduction methods C-UP-20 and
C-UP-50 and collocation nodes 𝑟ℎ ∈ {500, 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500}. The corresponding timings are reported in Table 3 for a comparison
with the full-order method. The computational cost of the submesh update can be reduced by restricting the collocation nodes that
can be selected only to a neighborhood of the current submesh.


5.2.2. Large geometrical deformations (INS-2)
    A situation where the methodology devised may fail is considered. One of the main problems of employing rSVD modes to
linearly approximate solution manifolds with respect to nonlinear dimension reduction methods that employ neural networks, is a
slow Kolmogorov n-width decay or, from a diﬀerent point of view, the high generalization error on the test set. This is evident when
increasing the dimension of the linear reduced space, the error on the training set decreases, but the error in the test set does not.
    An example of this behavior is shown in Fig. 22. This time we want to approximate the solution manifold corresponding to the
parameter range for the slant angle 𝜃 ∈ [15◦ , 35◦ ]. We sample uniformly 50 slant angles:
                      (               )
         = {15◦ + 𝑖 ⋅ (35◦ − 15◦ )∕49 |𝑖 ∈ {0, … , 49}} × 𝑉 ,                 || = 50 ⋅ 1000,                                                                      (30)
and, as usual, we number the test parameters in order from 1 to 50. The training and test parameters of the previous section 5.2.1,
correspond to the indices {1, 3, 5, 7, 9} for the training slant angles and {2, 4, 6, 8} for the test slant angles.
   With reference to Fig. 21 below, it is clear that a linear approximant of the whole solution manifold cannot be used, if the
computational budget is limited to only 13 training time series. The worse test error from parameter 27 to 47 corresponds to diﬀerent
characteristics of the flow: at diﬀerent values of the slant angle, diﬀerent properties of the flow can be observed, see [43]. Increasing
the computational budget, local linear reduced basis achieve substantial improvements. The results in terms of mean 𝐿2 reconstruction
error are reported in Fig. 21 below. Each local linear solution manifold approximant is highlighted by shaded backgrounds of diﬀerent
colors. The leftmost corresponds to the parameters’ range of the previous section 5.2.2.


                                                                                25
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 20. INS-1. The decay of the mean 𝐿2 relative error is assessed for the C-UP20, and C-UP50 reduced over-collocation methods with sampling strategies corre­
sponding to the gradient-based adaptive one every 50 and 20 time steps, respectively. In this case we employ a reference time step of four times (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.0005 s the
full-order model one (Δ𝑡)ref = 0.0001 s. The baseline represented by the autoencoder mean 𝐿2 reconstruction error AE-REC is reported.




Fig. 21. INS-2. Left: Ahmed body with slant angle 𝜃 = 15◦ from the training parameter set. Right: Ahmed body with slant angle 𝜃 = 35◦ from the training parameter
set.



    Neural networks are known to overcome this problem with truly nonlinear dimension reduction algorithms, that is, with respect
to the methodology introduced in this work, without the direct involvement of linear rSVD basis. Possible hyper-reduction strategies
that can be applied to a general truly nonlinear neural network architecture are studied in [9]. Nevertheless, the methodology
presented in this work could eﬀectively be applied for each of the four subdomains in Fig. 22 with satisfactory accuracy in terms of
test reconstruction error.

6. Discussion

    Some crucial considerations not yet underlined, are the subject of this section:

   • choice of latent dimension. The latent dimensionality equal to 𝐫 = 𝟒 and the number of rSVD modes equal to 𝐫rSVD = 𝟏𝟓𝟎 or
     𝐫rSVD = 𝟑𝟎𝟎 are not chosen after parametric studies and therefore more optimal values for the problems at hand can be generally
     found. As long as we obtain a satisfactory approximation of the solution manifold for some values of the latent dimension of the
     autoencoder and of the reduced dimension of the linear projections, we did not change them, thus exploiting the possibility to
     employ the same neural networks architectures shown in Tables A.4 and A.5 for our numerical investigations. In fact, our focus
     is in the hyper-reduction methodologies applied after a relatively accurate nonlinear approximant of the solution manifold is
     obtained. Fixed a tolerance for the 𝐿2 relative reconstruction error, the best value for 𝑟rSVD can be eﬃciently found observing
     the decay of the reconstruction error as done in section 5.2.2 for the INS-2 test case. Also, the latent dimensionality of the
     autoencoder cannot be established a priori, for some theoretical bounds see [51]. Nevertheless, many empirical studies can be
     performed to determine the latent dimensionality [52].
   • non collocated hyper-reduction methods. The non collocated versions of the hyper-reduction methods introduced in section 3
     do not perform better in terms of accuracy as shown in Fig. 9, with respect to the collocated variants. The same gappy DEIM
     implementation performs well when applied in synergy with teacher-student training of a reduced decoder for a 2d nonlinear
     conservation law parametric model in [9], the only physical field considered is velocity, so normalization is not needed. Anyway,
     in terms of eﬃciency, collocation methods are faster since they do not perform additional matrix-vector multiplications (for DEIM


                                                                               26
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. 22. INS-2. Studies of the decay of the mean 𝐿2 reconstruction errors d­fined through equations (10a) for the 50 geometrical deformations in (30). For brevity,
we report only the errors on the velocity field. Top: approximation of the whole solution manifold with 13 training time series. It is evident the major drawback in
employing linear approximants: the generalization error on the test set remains high even if the reduced dimension is increased from 50 to 800. Bottom: approximation
of the solution manifold with 4 local linear approximants. They are highlighted by the shaded regions in background. The leftmost corresponds to the solution manifold
studied in the previous section 5.2.1.



     and DEIM-SOPT) or scalar products (ECSW), after the evaluation of the residuals at the magic points. Moreover, employing
     adaptive hyper-reduction strategies in the online stage has higher computational costs for non collocated approaches since
     pseudo-inverse matrices need to be evaluated (for DEIM).
   • stability issues. Reduced over-collocation methods may bring unstable numerical schemes, especially if the solution manifold is
     not approximated with enough accuracy by the nonlinear approximant. In our case, the reconstruction error of the autoencoders
     was satisfactory enough not to have stability issues inside the training range. Possible solutions involve the training of NN
     architectures with a more smooth latent space and more regular maps such as those that should be guaranteed by variational
     autoencoders [29] or other machine learning architectures. On this line of thought, many additional inductive biases can be
     imposed. However, from the point of view of numerical analysis, stabilization strategies for ROMs have frequently been employed
     also for the classical projection-based methodologies as they often suﬀer from stability issues, especially when hyper-reduction is
     applied. Possible solutions include structure-preserving and/or regularized versions [53,54] of hyper-reduction methods. Further
     stability issues that may be inherited by the ROM from the FOM, e.g. inf-sup stability [1] for the INS, are the focus of future
     studies.
   • inductive biases and autoencoder regularity. The training and the NN architecture itself can be enriched by inductive biases.
     Among them, there are first principles (e.g. conservation laws), geometrical symmetries (group equivariant filters [28]), latent
     operators/numerical schemes (e.g. operator inference [55,56]) latent regularity (supposedly imposed by variational autoencoders
     and other architectures), structure-preservation [57], other numerical and mathematical properties (e.g. positiveness).
   • comparison with linear ROMs. In general, the overhead represented by the nonlinear approximant is compensated by the fact
     that the dimension of the latent variable is signiﬁcantly reduced: in our test cases from 𝑝 = 300 to 𝑟𝑟𝑆𝑉 𝐷 = 4. A direct comparison
     for other choices of nonlinear approximant has been reported in [12].


                                                                              27
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                         Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
7. Conclusions

    We developed and tested on challenging benchmarks a new method that exploits nonlinear solution manifold approximants. It
relies on convolutional autoencoders and linear transforms/filter maps (speciﬁcally parallel randomized singular value decomposi­
tion) to approximate solution manifolds even when aﬀected by a moderately slow Kolmogorov n-width decay. The main novelty
resides in the implementation of new eﬃcient collocated and adaptive gradient-based hyper-reduction strategies speciﬁcally tailored
for our choice of nonlinear approximants. Local solution manifold approximations and eﬃcient ways to perform the change of basis
are also taken into consideration. We managed to achieve signiﬁcant speedups while keeping a satisfactory accuracy even when we
considered small benchmarks in terms of degrees of freedom, implemented in OpenFoam. Our test cases model complex physics such
as the compressible and incompressible turbulent Navier-Stokes equations and suﬀer from a moderately slow Kolmogorov n-width
decay that would need in the order of hundreds of linear basis to be well-approximated by classical projection-based ROMs.
    The crucial objective that we want to reach with our methodology is the development of numerically and physically explicable
model order reduction methods while exploiting machine learning architectures. The majority of scientific machine learning strategies
employ neural networks in the predictive/online stage as black box surrogate models, without exploiting the underlying physics of
the models embedded in the numerical schemes of the full-order models’ solvers. Diﬀerently, our approach eﬃciently exploits the
numerical schemes also in the predictive phase, with the possibility to characterize the latent solutions found as minimizers of the
residuals of conservation laws. The interpretability of the results is evidently increased.
    The main disadvantages regard the employment of linear basis: parametric models that suﬀer for a slow Kolmogorov n-width
decay, such as the incompressible flow around the Ahmed body with geometrical deformations studied in section 5.2.2, may require
too many computational resources to obtain local linear approximations of the solution manifold. The use of more generic truly
nonlinear neural networks architectures should bring lower generalization errors. Some implementations of hyper-reduction for
generic NN architectures involve teacher-student training and are presented in [9].
    Other aspects that can be substantially improved are stabilization issues: the development of stabilization mechanisms that would
aid the nonlinear least-squares optimizers in the search for a physically accurate latent solution would greatly improve our method­
ology. On the same subject, structure-preserving and other regularizing frameworks, without mentioning additional useful inductive
biases, would also help to achieve more accurate solutions.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

   Francesco Romor: Writing -- original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Giovanni Stabile: Writing -- review & editing, Concep­
tualization. Gianluigi Rozza: Writing -- review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Declaration of competing interest

    The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing
interests: Gianluigi Rozza reports financial support and administrative support were provided by International School for Advanced
Studies.

Acknowledgements

   This work was partially funded by European Union Funding for Research and Innovation - Horizon 2020 Program - in the
framework of European Research Council Executive Agency: H2020 ERC CoG 2015 AROMA-CFD project 681447 ``Advanced Reduced
Order Methods with Applications in Computational Fluid Dynamics'' P.I. Professor Gianluigi Rozza. We also acknowledge the PRIN
2017 ``Numerical Analysis for Full and Reduced Order Methods for the eﬃcient and accurate solution of complex systems governed by
Partial Diﬀerential Equations'' (NA_FROM_PDEs). GS acknowledges the financial support under the National Recovery and Resilience
Plan (NRRP), Mission 4, Component 2, Investment 1.1, Call for tender No. 1409 published on 14.9.2022 by the Italian Ministry of
University and Research (MUR), funded by the European Union -- NextGenerationEU -- Project Title ROMEU -- CUP P2022FEZS3 --
Grant Assignment Decree No. 1379 adopted on 01/09/2023 by the Italian Ministry of Ministry of University and Research (MUR)
and acknowledges the financial support by the European Union (ERC, DANTE, GA-101115741). Views and opinions expressed are
however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily r­flect those of the European Union or the European Research Council
Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.




                                                               28
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
Appendix A. Architectures

    We report here the details of the architectures of the Convolutional Autoencoders employed.

                     Table A.4
                     The 1d Convolutional Autoencoder for the CNS1 on the coarse mesh in subsection 5.1.1. The labels ‘Act’, ‘Pad’, and ‘Str’
                     stand for Activations, Padding and Strides, respectively.

                          Encoder    Act     Weights            Pad     Str          Decoder       Act       Weights           Pad     Str

                          Conv1d     ELU     [1, 8, 4, 4]       1       2            Linear        ELU       [4, 512]          -
                          Conv1d     ELU     [8, 16, 4, 4]      1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [128, 64, 5, 5]   1       2
                          Conv1d     ELU     [16, 32, 4, 4]     1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [64, 32, 4, 4]    1       2
                          Conv1d     ELU     [32, 64, 4, 4]     1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [32, 16, 5, 5]    1       2
                          Conv1d     ELU     [64, 128, 4, 4]    1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [16, 8, 5, 5]     1       2
                          Linear     ELU     [512, 4]           -                    ConvTr1d      ReLU      [8, 1, 4, 4]      1       2


                     Table A.5
                     The 1d Convolutional Autoencoder for the CNS2 on the finer mesh in subsections 5.1.2 and for the INS1 in subsection 5.2.1.

                          Encoder    Act     Weights            Pad     Str          Decoder       Act       Weights           Pad     Str

                          Conv1d     ELU     [1, 8, 4, 4]       1       2            Linear        ELU       [4, 512]          -
                          Conv1d     ELU     [8, 16, 4, 4]      1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [128, 64, 5, 5]   1       2
                          Conv1d     ELU     [16, 32, 4, 4]     1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [64, 32, 4, 4]    1       2
                          Conv1d     ELU     [32, 64, 4, 4]     1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [32, 16, 5, 5]    1       2
                          Conv1d     ELU     [64, 128, 4, 4]    1       2            ConvTr1d      ELU       [16, 8, 5, 5]     1       2
                          Linear     ELU     [512, 4]           -                    ConvTr1d      ReLU      [8, 1, 4, 4]      1       2




                                                                              29
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                             Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
Appendix B. Predicted snapshots

    Some snapshots associated to the test cases studied are reported: Fig. B.23 refers to the CNS1 test case in section 5.1.1, Fig. B.24
refers to the CNS2 test case in section 5.1.2 and finally Figs. B.25 and B.26 refers to the test case INS1 in section 5.2.1.




Fig. B.23. CNS1. Predicted velocity, density, internal energy and pressure fields for the test case described in section 5.1.1 with Ma = 3.314 corresponding to test
parameter number 3 at the final time instant 𝑡 = 2.5 s. The number of cells is 4500 the total number of degrees of freedom is 27000. The number of collocation nodes
is 𝑟ℎ = 500.




                                                                             30
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                             Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. B.24. CNS2. Predicted velocity, density, internal energy and pressure fields for the test case described in section 5.1.1 with Ma = 2.622 corresponding to test
parameter number 3 at the final time instant 𝑡 = 2.5 s. The number of cells is 32160 the total number of degrees of freedom is 192960. The adaptive magic points are
shown in Fig. 4. The number of collocation nodes is 𝑟ℎ = 700.




                                                                             31
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. B.25. INS1. Predicted velocity and pressure fields for the test case described in section 5.2.1 with corresponding to test parameter number 1 at the time instant
s 𝑡 ∈ {0.025 s, 0.05 s, 0.075 s, 0.1 s}. The number of cells is 32160 the total number of degrees of freedom is 192960. The number of collocation nodes is 𝑟ℎ = 2000.
The adaptive magic points are shown in Fig. B.26.




                                                                              32
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                              Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729




Fig. B.26. INS1. Adaptive collocation nodes for the test case described in section 5.2.1 with corresponding test parameter number 1 at the time instants
𝑡 ∈ {0.025 s, 0.05 s, 0.075 s, 0.1 s}. The number of collocation nodes is 𝑟ℎ = 2000. The number of cells is 198633 the total number of degrees of freedom is 993165.
Above 4 slices: bottom view of the Ahmed body. Below 4 slices: lateral view of the Ahmed body.




Data availability

    Data will be made available on request.

References

 [1] J.S. Hesthaven, G. Rozza, B. Stamm, et al., Cert­fied Reduced Basis Methods for Parametrized Partial Diﬀerential Equations, vol. 590, Springer, 2016.
 [2] G. Rozza, G. Stabile, F. Ballarin, Advanced Reduced Order Methods and Applications in Computational Fluid Dynamics, SIAM, 2022.
 [3] R.A. DeVore, R. Howard, C. Micchelli, Optimal nonlinear approximation, Manuscr. Math. 63 (1989) 469--478, https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01171759.
 [4] A. Cohen, R. DeVore, G. Petrova, P. Wojtaszczyk, Optimal stable nonlinear approximation, Found. Comput. Math. 22 (2021) 607--648, https://doi.org/10.1007/
     s10208-021-09494-z.
 [5] G. Petrova, P. Wojtaszczyk, Lipschitz widths, Constr. Approx. 57 (2022) 759--805, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00365-022-09576-3.
 [6] K. Lee, K.T. Carlberg, Model reduction of dynamical systems on nonlinear manifolds using deep convolutional autoencoders, J. Comput. Phys. 404 (2020) 108973,
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2019.108973.
 [7] Y. Kim, Y. Choi, D. Widemann, T. Zohdi, A fast and accurate physics-informed neural network reduced order model with shallow masked autoencoder, J. Comput.
     Phys. 451 (2022) 110841, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110841.
 [8] K. Carlberg, C. Farhat, J. Cortial, D. Amsallem, The gnat method for nonlinear model reduction: eﬀective implementation and application to computational fluid
     dynamics and turbulent flows, J. Comput. Phys. 242 (2013) 623--647, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2013.02.028.
 [9] F. Romor, G. Stabile, G. Rozza, Non-linear manifold reduced-order models with convolutional autoencoders and reduced over-collocation method, J. Sci. Comput.
     94 (2023) 74, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915-023-02128-2.
[10] Y. Chen, S. Gottlieb, L. Ji, Y. Maday, An eim-degradation free reduced basis method via over collocation and residual hyper reduction-based error estimation, J.
     Comput. Phys. 444 (2021) 110545, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110545.
[11] L.F.G. Marcantoni, J.P. Tamagno, S.A. Elaskar, High speed flow simulation using openfoam, Mec. Comput. 31 (2012) 2939--2959.
[12] J. Barnett, C. Farhat, Y. Maday, Neural-network-augmented projection-based model order reduction for mitigating the Kolmogorov barrier to reducibility, J.
     Comput. Phys. 492 (2023) 112420, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2023.112420, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999123005156.
[13] C. Farhat, T. Chapman, P. Avery, Structure-preserving, stability, and accuracy properties of the energy-conserving sampling and weighting method for the hyper
     reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 102 (2015) 1077--1110, https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.4820.
[14] J. Cocola, J. Tencer, F. Rizzi, E. Parish, P. Blonigan, Hyper-reduced autoencoders for eﬃcient and accurate nonlinear model reductions, arXiv preprint arXiv:
     2303.09630, 2023.
[15] A.N. Diaz, Y. Choi, M. Heinkenschloss, A fast and accurate domain decomposition nonlinear manifold reduced order model, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng.
     425 (2024) 116943, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2024.116943, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045782524001993.
[16] S. Fresca, A. Manzoni, Pod-dl-rom: enhancing deep learning-based reduced order models for nonlinear parametrized pdes by proper orthogonal decomposition,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 388 (2022) 114181, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2021.114181.
[17] B. Peherstorfer, Model reduction for transport-dominated problems via online adaptive bases and adaptive sampling, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 42 (2020)
     A2803--A2836, https://doi.org/10.1137/19M1257275.
[18] Y. Wen, E. Vanden-Eijnden, B. Peherstorfer, Coupling parameter and particle dynamics for adaptive sampling in neural Galerkin schemes, Phys. D, Nonlinear
     Phenom. 462 (2024) 134129, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2024.134129, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167278924000800.
[19] S. Wild, Solving Derivative-Free Nonlinear Least Squares Problems with POUNDERS, Argonne National Lab., 2014.
[20] S. Balay, S. Abhyankar, M. Adams, J. Brown, P. Brune, K. Buschelman, L. Dalcin, A. Dener, V. Eijkhout, W. Gropp, et al., Petsc Users Manual, 2019.
[21] T. O’Leary-Roseberry, U. Villa, P. Chen, O. Ghattas, Derivative-informed projected neural networks for high-dimensional parametric maps governed by pdes,
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 388 (2022) 114199, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2021.114199.



                                                                              33
F. Romor, G. Stabile and G. Rozza
                                                                                                               Journal of Computational Physics 524 (2025) 113729
[22] P.G. Constantine, Active Subspaces: Emerging Ideas for Dimension Reduction in Parameter Studies, SIAM, 2015.
[23] Q. Fournier, D. Aloise, Empirical comparison between autoencoders and traditional dimensionality reduction methods, in: 2019 IEEE Second International
     Conference on Art­ficial Intelligence and Knowledge Engineering (AIKE), 2019, pp. 211--214.
[24] N. Guglielmi, M. López-Fernández, M. Manucci, Pseudospectral roaming contour integral methods for convection-diffusion equations, J. Sci. Comput. 89 (2021)
     1--31, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915-021-01601-0.
[25] F. Nobile, D. Pradovera, Non-intrusive double-greedy parametric model reduction by interpolation of frequency-domain rational surrogates, ESAIM: Math. Model.
     Numer. Anal. 55 (2021) 1895--1920, https://doi.org/10.1051/m2an/2021040.
[26] R. Hawkins, M. Khalid, K. Smetana, J. Trampert, Model order reduction for seismic waveform modelling: inspiration from normal modes, Geophys. J. Int. 234
     (2023) 2255--2283, https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggad195.
[27] T. Long, R. Barnett, R. Jefferson-Loveday, G. Stabile, M. Icardi, A reduced-order model for advection-dominated problems based on the Radon cumulative
     distribution transform, Adv. Comput. Math. 51 (2025), https://doi.org/10.1007/s10444-024-10209-5.
[28] M.M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, Y. LeCun, A. Szlam, P. Vandergheynst, Geometric deep learning: going beyond Euclidean data, IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 34 (2017)
     18--42, https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2017.2693418.
[29] D.P. Kingma, M. Welling, Auto-encoding variational Bayes, arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
[30] N. Halko, P.G. Martinsson, J.A. Tropp, Finding structure with randomness: probabilistic algorithms for constructing approximate matrix decompositions, SIAM
     Rev. 53 (2011) 217--288, https://doi.org/10.1137/090771806.
[31] M. Ghashami, E. Liberty, J.M. Phillips, D.P. Woodruff, Frequent directions: simple and deterministic matrix sketching, SIAM J. Comput. 45 (2016) 1762--1792,
     https://doi.org/10.1137/15m1009718.
[32] T. Isaac, N. Petra, G. Stadler, O. Ghattas, Scalable and eﬃcient algorithms for the propagation of uncertainty from data through inference to prediction for
     large-scale problems, with application to flow of the Antarctic ice sheet, J. Comput. Phys. 296 (2015) 348--368, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2015.04.047.
[33] E.J. Parish, F. Rizzi, On the impact of dimensionally-consistent and physics-based inner products for pod-Galerkin and least-squares model reduction of com­
     pressible flows, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16492, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2023.112387.
[34] S. Chaturantabut, D.C. Sorensen, Nonlinear model reduction via discrete empirical interpolation, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 32 (2010) 2737--2764, https://doi.org/
     10.1137/090766498.
[35] J.T. Lauzon, S.W. Cheung, Y. Shin, Y. Choi, D.M. Copeland, K. Huynh, S-opt: a points selection algorithm for hyper-reduction in reduced order models, SIAM J.
     Sci. Comput. 46 (2024) B474--B501, https://doi.org/10.1137/22M1484018.
[36] Y. Choi, D. Coombs, R. Anderson, Sns: a solution-based nonlinear subspace method for time-dependent model order reduction, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 42 (2020)
     A1116--A1146, https://doi.org/10.1137/19M1242963.
[37] Y. Shin, D. Xiu, Nonadaptive quasi-optimal points selection for least squares linear regression, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 38 (2016) A385--A411, https://doi.org/10.
     1137/15M1015868.
[38] C.L. Lawson, R.J. Hanson, Solving Least Squares Problems, SIAM, 1995.
[39] G. Guennebaud, B. Jacob, et al., Eigen v3, http://eigen.tuxfamily.org, 2010.
[40] T. Daniel, F. Casenave, N. Akkari, D. Ryckelynck, Model order reduction assisted by deep neural networks (rom-net), Adv. Model. Simul. Eng. Sci. 7 (2020) 1--27,
     https://doi.org/10.1186/s40323-020-00153-6.
[41] H.G. Weller, G. Tabor, H. Jasak, C. Fureby, A tensorial approach to computational continuum mechanics using object-oriented techniques, Comput. Phys. 12
     (1998) 620, https://doi.org/10.1063/1.168744.
[42] G. Stabile, S. Hijazi, A. Mola, S. Lorenzi, G. Rozza, POD-Galerkin reduced order methods for CFD using finite volume discretisation: vortex shedding around a
     circular cylinder, Commun. Appl. Ind. Math. 8 (2017) 210--236, https://doi.org/10.1515/caim-2017-0011.
[43] M. Zancanaro, M. Mrosek, G. Stabile, C. Othmer, G. Rozza, Hybrid neural network reduced order modelling for turbulent flows with geometric parameters, Fluids
     6 (2021) 296, https://doi.org/10.3390/ﬂuids6080296.
[44] R. Issa, B. Ahmadi-Befrui, K. Beshay, A. Gosman, Solution of the implicitly discretised reacting flow equations by operator-splitting, J. Comput. Phys. 93 (1991)
     388--410, https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(91)90191-M.
[45] S.V. Patankar, D.B. Spalding, A calculation procedure for heat, mass and momentum transfer in three-dimensional parabolic flows, in: Numerical Prediction of
     Flow, Heat Transfer, Turbulence and Combustion, Elsevier, 1983, pp. 54--73.
[46] D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: a method for stochastic optimization, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[47] F. Moukalled, L. Mangani, M. Darwish, F. Moukalled, L. Mangani, M. Darwish, The Finite Volume Method, Springer, 2016.
[48] R. Zimmermann, Manifold interpolation, system- and data-driven methods and algorithms, in: P. Benner, S. Grivet-Talocia, A. Quarteroni, G. Rozza, W. Schilders,
     L.M. Silveira (Eds.), Model Order Reduct. 1 (2021) 229--274, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110498967-007.
[49] P. Spalart, S. Allmaras, A one-equation turbulence model for aerodynamic flows, in: 30th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 1992, p. 439.
[50] D.C. Wilcox, et al., Turbulence Modeling for CFD, vol. 2, DCW Industries, La Canada, CA, 1998.
[51] N. Franco, A. Manzoni, P. Zunino, A deep learning approach to reduced order modelling of parameter dependent partial diﬀerential equations, Math. Comput.
     92 (2023) 483--524, https://doi.org/10.1090/mcom/3781.
[52] F. Denti, D. Doimo, A. Laio, A. Mira, The generalized ratios intrinsic dimension estimator, Sci. Rep. 12 (2022) 20005, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-
     20991-1.
[53] R.B. Klein, B. Sanderse, Structure-preserving hyper-reduction and temporal localization for reduced order models of incompressible flows, arXiv preprint arXiv:
     2304.09229, 2023.
[54] R. Herkert, P. Buchfink, B. Haasdonk, Dictionary-based online-adaptive structure-preserving model order reduction for parametric Hamiltonian systems, Adv.
     Comput. Math. 50 (2024), https://doi.org/10.1007/s10444-023-10102-7.
[55] B. Peherstorfer, K. Willcox, Data-driven operator inference for nonintrusive projection-based model reduction, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 306 (2016)
     196--215, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2016.03.025.
[56] W.I.T. Uy, D. Hartmann, B. Peherstorfer, Operator inference with roll outs for learning reduced models from scarce and low-quality data, Comput. Math. Appl.
     145 (2023) 224--239, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2023.06.012.
[57] P. Buchfink, S. Glas, B. Haasdonk, Symplectic model reduction of Hamiltonian systems on nonlinear manifolds and approximation with weakly symplectic
     autoencoder, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 45 (2023) A289--A311, https://doi.org/10.1137/21M1466657.




                                                                              34
